Obesity, alcohol consumption, physical inactivity and postmenopausal hormone use are known modifiable risk factors for breast cancer. We aim to measure incidence rates of breast cancer for women with favorable levels on all 4 risk factors (BMI 30 kg/ m2, alcohol < 1 drink/week, physically active and no current hormone use) and to evaluate their associations with estrogen. The 5,054 postmenopausal women in the Copenhagen City Heart Study were asked about risk factors at baseline in 1981-3 and were followed until 2002 in the Danish Cancer Registry, with < 0.1% loss to follow-up. Estradiol was measured in a subset of 1,042 women. During follow-up, 263 women developed breast cancer. Twenty-six percent of the women had a favourable risk factor profile, and their breast cancer rates were markedly lower (154 per 100,000 years) than women with 31 risk factors (460 per 100,000 years). One, two and three risk factors were associated with hazard ratios of 1.38 (95% CI: 0.99; 1.92), 1.84 (1.26; 2.67) and 2.79 (1.59; 4.88) compared to women with a favourable profile. Each of the risk factors was associated with estrogen. In conclusion, the risk of breast cancer was markedly lower for women with a favourable risk profile than for other women and lower estrogen levels is a possible explanation. ' 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Estrogens and other reproductive hormones play an important role in the etiology of breast cancer.3,4 Obesity, alcohol intake, physical activity and of course postmenopausal hormone use are hypothesized to alter the risk of breast cancer by affecting serum levels of estrogens. Estradiol, the most active estrogen metabolite, can bind to the estrogen receptors in the breast tissue, activate gene expression, and thereby increase cell proliferation.5 By this pathway, estrogens may promote growth of already initiated cells. There is also some evidence that estrogens can act as initiating agents themselves by being metabolized into more reactive intermediates that, in turn, may lead to structural changes in the DNA.6 The associations between modifiable risk factors for breast cancer and plasma levels of estrogens remains to be evaluated in a larger population sample.
The objective of the present study is to address the relation between a low risk factor profile and 20-year incidence of firsttime breast cancer in a cohort of postmenopausal women. Further, we aim to assess if the modifiable risk factors for breast cancer are associated with endogenous levels of estradiol in a subset of more than a 1,000 women.
The Copenhagen City Heart Study was initiated in 1976. An age-stratified sample of 19,698 men and women were randomly drawn from the Central Population Registry and invited to participate in the study. In 1981–83 the study population was supplemented with 500 men and women and additional study examinations were performed. The response rate at this examination was 70%. The 12,698 participants in the second examination counted 7,018 women and all participants gave informed consent. The study participants had their height and weights measured and were asked about alcohol consumption, physical activity and hormone use at the second examination, which is therefore used as baseline. The 5,297 postmenopausal women were included in the present study. Women with breast cancer before baseline (n 5 127) or with lacking information on body mass index, alcohol consumption, physical activity or hormone use (n 5 90) or other covariates (n 5 26) were excluded, leaving 5,054 women for the analyses. A detailed description of the Copenhagen City Heart Study has previously been published elsewhere.7
Hormone levels were assayed in a random sample of postmenopausal women (n 5 1,150) drawn from the base population in 1981–1983. Blood samples were not found on 86 of the women and 22 of the women had insufficient material for the hormone assessment, leaving 1,042 women for the 17b-estradiol analyses. The analyses of risk factors and hormonal levels were confined to the 832 women, who did not use postmenopausal hormones.
The modifiable risk factors included body mass index, alcohol consumption, physical activity and postmenopausal hormone use. Height and weight were measured with participants wearing light clothing without shoes. Body mass index (BMI) was calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared (kg/m2). As part of the self-administered questionnaire, the participants were asked about their average monthly, weekly, or daily consumption of beer (bottles), wine (glasses) or spirits (units). The total weekly alcohol consumption was calculated by adding the reported average number of drinks from each type of alcohol. It was assumed that 1 bottle of beer contains 12 g of ethanol, which can also be considered the average for 1 glass of wine and 1 unit of spirit. One standard glass of wine is one-sixth of a bottle of wine and a standard serving of spirits is 4 cl. For the analyses, alcohol consumption was classified into 4 categories according to total weekly intake of alcohol: less than 1, 1–7, 7–14 and more than 14 drinks/week. The questionnaire also included a multiplechoice question on physical activity in leisure time. The categories were as follows: none; 2–4 hr of light activity per week; more than 4 hr of light activity or 2-4 hr of high level activity and competitional level or more than 4 hr of hard level activity per week. The women answered questions about their menopausal status (pre/post-) and whether they used any hormonal substitution (yes/no). Women who were postmenopausal and reported to use hormones were defined as users of postmenopausal hormones.
A risk factor profile was defined based on BMI, alcohol consumption, physical activity and hormone use. The participants were defined as having a low risk profile when all of the following applied at baseline: BMI 30 kg/m2, alcohol consumption < 1 drink/week, physically active (2 or more hr of physical activity per week), no current hormone use.
The hormone analyses were conducted at a laboratory at the Danish National Research Centre for the Working Environment during 2006. All blood samples were taken after 30 min rest and the date and time for each blood sample were recorded. All samples for the hormone analyses were stored frozen at 220 C. Endogenous levels of estradiol were measured in serum. The hormones were measured in duplicate and the mean of the 2 measurements was used in the statistical analyses. The Radio Immune Assays (RIA) used for determination of 17ß-estradiol in serum was Coat-a-count kits purchased from Diagnostic Products Corporation (DPC, Los Angeles, CA). The analyses were carried out according to the manufacturer’s specifications. A 1470 Wizard gamma counter (Wallac, Turku, Finland) was used for measurement of radioactivity. A method evaluation of 17ß-estradiol was performed by use of Con6 Immunoassay Tri-level Controls from DPC at 3 levels. The method evaluation for 17ß-estradiol showed no bias of the method, recovery 103.7 95% CI: 99.0%; 108.3%. Limit of detection (LOD) was 9.8 pmol/l. To show equivalence between the different runs, Con6 Immunoassay Tri-level Controls from DPC were analysed for 17ß-estradiol together with the samples.8,9 Westgard control charts were used to document that the analytical method remained in analytical and statistical control, that is, the trueness and the precision of the analytical methods remained stable.
Participants were followed from date of the second examination till date of first diagnosis of primary breast cancer (n 5 263), death (n 5 2,439), emigration (n 5 6), or end of follow-up on December 31, 2002 (n 5 2,346). Thus, less than 0.1 percent of the women were lost to follow-up due to emigration. Using the civil registry number, which is unique to every Danish citizen, primary breast cancer events were identified through linkage to the Danish National Cancer Registry, which contains data on all cancer diagnoses in Denmark. The following ICD7-codes were used to identify primary invasive breast cancer cases: 170.0–170.5, 470.0– 470.5 and 870.0–870.2. The vital status of the study population was followed in the Central Death Registry.
The risk of breast cancer associated with risk factor profile was assessed in a prospective study design. First, the associations between each the modifiable risk factors and risk of breast cancer were assessed separately in a multivariate Cox model with age as the time scale. Secondly, age-standardized incidence rates were calculated according to risk factor profile. The age distributions were standardized to the European Standard Population10 by direct methods. Subsequently, a multivariate Cox regression model was fitted to adjust for potential confounding from age, parity, height,
cohabitation, education and psychological stress. Physical activity was not predictive of breast cancer risk in the present study, and an alternative risk score, which only included body mass index, alcohol consumption and hormone use, were therefore constructed, and the risk of breast cancer was also estimated according to this score. Finally, we assessed the effect of individual combinations of body mass index, alcohol consumption and hormone use on breast cancer risk to evaluate how each of the risk factors behaved within strata of the other risk factors.
The associations of body mass index, alcohol intake, physical activity and hormone use with levels of endogenous 17b-estradiol were addressed in a cross-sectional study design. Sex steroid hormones are known to have a circadian rhythm, which makes it important to control for the time at which the blood is drawn. We graphically examined the circadian pattern of estradiol, and we found almost no variation in estradiol levels during the day in the present study. Still, we adjusted our models for time of blood draw to account for even minor variations in hormone levels. We regressed levels of estradiol on categories of each the modifiable risk factors in a linear regression model. Because of nonnormal (skewed) distributions and heteroscedastic variances (proportional to level of measurements) in the hormone data, all concentrations of the estradiol were analysed on logarithmic scales. The regression models were adjusted for age, body mass index, physical activity, alcohol consumption, tobacco smoking, education and time of day for blood draw. We included age as linear splines with 2 knots at ages 55 and 70 to adjust for changing associations between age and hormone levels. We estimated the relative change in geometric mean, which is the percentage difference in mean hormone level in one group compared to the mean hormone level in the reference group.
The mean age at baseline was 62 years. Twenty-six percent of the women belonged to the low risk group, whereas 25 percent had 2 or more modifiable risk factors for breast cancer (Table I). A more adverse risk factor profile was associated with younger age. Eleven percent of the women had a body mass index above 30 kg/m2, 52 percent drank alcohol on a weekly basis, 20 percent were physically inactive (i.e. reported 1 hr of physical activity per week) in their leisure time and 20 percent used postmenopausal hormones. By definition, the proportion of women with each of these risk factors increased with a more adverse risk factor profile. Among women with 3 or more risk factors, almost everyone drank alcohol and was physically inactive, about 3-quarters used hormones, and almost half were obese.
During 20 years of follow-up, 263 of the eligible 5,054 postmenopausal women suffered from a first-time incident breast cancer. A body mass index above 30 kg/m2 was associated with a 50% higher risk of breast cancer (HR51.50; 95% CI: 1.02–2.22) compared to normal weight women (Table II). Alcohol consumption was also associated with higher risk of breast cancer in an increasing dose-response manner. A weekly alcohol intake above 14 drinks was associated with a hazard ratio of 1.67 (1.05–2.65) compared to an alcohol intake of below 1 drink per week. The risk estimates for physical activity were rather unstable and there were no clear associations with breast cancer risk. Current postmenopausal hormone use was associated with about a doubling of the risk of breast cancer (1.96; 1.49–2.57).
Women with a low risk factor profile had a markedly lower age-standardized incidence rate of breast cancer (154 per 100,000 years) compared to those with a risk profile consisting of 3 or No.
Age at baseline (year); mean (SD) Body mass index > 30 kg/m2 (%) Alcohol consumption 1 drink/week (%) Physical inactive (%) Postmenopausal hormone use (%) Body mass index < 18.5 kg/m2 149 18.5–25 kg/m2 2,642 26–30 kg/m2 1,729 > 30 kg/m2 534 Alcohol consumption < 1 drink/week 2,405 1–7 drinks/week 1,769 8–14 drinks/week 583 > 14 drinks/week 297 Physical activity
None 993 Low 2,637 Medium 1,374
High 50 Postmenopausal hormone use
No 4,051 Yes 1,003 TABLE I – BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS OF 5,054 HEALTHY POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE SECOND EXAMINATION OF THE COPENHAGEN CITY HEART STUDY IN 1981–1983 ACCORDING TO THEIR RISK FACTOR PROFILE 1Standardized to the age distribution of the European Standard Population.–2Adjusted for age, parity, height, cohabitation, education, psychological stress, body mass index, alcohol consumption, physical activity, and postmenopausal hormone use.
TABLE III – AGE-STANDARDIZED INCIDENCE RATE AND MULTIPLE-ADJUSTED HAZARD RATIO OF FIRST TIME INCIDENT BREAST CANCER AMONG 5054 POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN ACCORDING TO RISK PROFILE 0.87 (0.35; 2.12)
Ref 1.01 (0.77; 1.32) 1.50 (1.02; 2.22)
Ref 1.19 (0.90; 1.58) 1.29 (0.87; 1.92) 1.67 (1.05; 2.65)
Ref 1.01 (0.71; 1.44) 1.22 (0.84; 1.78) 1.49 (0.53; 4.18)
Ref 1.96 (1.49; 2.57) Age-standardized1 incidence rate/100,000 years (95 % CI) 154 (107; 201) 256 (199; 314) 314 (226; 401) 460 (228; 693)
Multiple-adjusted2 hazard ratio (95 % CI)
Ref 1.38 (0.99; 1.92) 1.84 (1.26; 2.67) 2.79 (1.59; 4.88) 1Standardized to the age distribution of the European Standard Population.–2Adjusted for age, parity, height, cohabitation, education, psychological stress.–3Low risk: BMI 30 kg/m2, no alcohol consumption, physically active, no hormone use. more risk factors (460 per 100,000 years) (Table III). The incidence rates of breast cancer increased significantly for each additional risk factor that was added to the risk profile. In a multipleadjusted model, a more adverse risk factor profile was associated with higher risk of breast cancer in a dose-response manner. Having a risk factor profile with 3 or more risk factors was associated with a 2.79 higher risk of breast cancer (95% CI: 1.59–4.88) compared to women with a low risk factor profile. Assuming that the estimated associations resembled the magnitude of causal effects, 29 percent of all breast cancer cases could be ascribed to an unfavourable risk profile with 1 or more risk factors. Excluding physical activity from the risk score resulted in even stronger estimates with 1, 2 and 3 risk factors being associated with hazard ratios of 1.34 (95% CI: 0.98; 1.81), 2.23 (1.56; 3.20), and 4.97 (1.99; 12.44) compared to women with a low risk factor profile. Combining alcohol consumption, obesity and hormone use showed a more than additive effect of the combination of these 3 risk factors on breast cancer risk (Fig. 1).
The majority of the women had their blood drawn in the morning between 8 am and noon (76%). The median 17b-estradiol value was 24.9 pmol/l with 10th and 90th percentiles of 7.4 pmol/l and 122.5 pmol/l for women who did not take exogenous hormones. No significant difference in blood concentration of 17ß-estradiol was observed between samples collected between 8 am and 3 pm (p 5 0.35). The median values of 17b-estradiol were higher among women with high ( > 30 kg/m2) or low ( < 18.5 kg/m2) body mass index compared to women of normal weight (Table IV). After adjustment for age and time of blood draw, women with high or low body mass index had 50–60% higher mean level of 17b-estradiol compared to normal weight women. Further adjustment for potential confounders only slightly changed the risk estimates. Higher weekly alcohol intake also seemed to be associated with higher levels of endogenous 17b-estradiol, although the confidence intervals were broad. Physical activity seemed to be associated with mean levels of 17b-estradiol in an inverse linear doseresponse manner, so that higher physical activity was associated with lower mean levels of estradiol. Among women who did not take hormones, 2 or more risk factors were associated with a 46% higher mean level of estradiol compared to those who reported no risk factors. Use of exogenous hormones was naturally associated with higher plasma levels of estradiol, so that women who used postmenopausal hormones had about 8 times higher mean levels of 17b-estradiol than women who did not use hormones.
We found postmenopausal women with a favourable risk factor profile to have a markedly lower absolute and relative risk of developing first-time breast cancer relative to women with a higher risk factor profile. The risk seemed to increase with each additional modifiable risk factor. High alcohol intake, obesity and physical inactivity were associated with higher levels of circulating estrogens, and the higher risk of breast cancer associated with a high risk factor profile may be mediated through a hormonal pathway.
A previous study from California estimated the population attributable risks related to modifiable risk factors for breast cancer and found that as many as 11% of new breast cancer cases could be attributable to postmenopausal hormone use, 20% to consuming 2 or more alcoholic drinks daily, 15% to physical inactivity, and 11% may be attributable to never breastfeeding.11 They addressed each of these modifiable risk factors individually, but as they may be correlated, the combined effect could not be directly summed up. A combined effect, as the one reported in the present study, would probably have been a more relevant measure of interest, but was not available in the Californian study. We found that as many as 29% of all breast cancer cases may be attributable to an unfavourable risk profile in our cohort.
In general, we found the individual risk factors to be associated with breast cancer risk in an expected manner. The association between alcohol intake and breast cancer has been studied in several cohort and case–control studies and the evidence has been summarized in reviews and meta-analyses.12–15 The existing evidence has suggested a small, but consistent increase in the risk of breast cancer with increasing alcohol intake, similar to the one observed in the present study. Also consistent with our results, both hormone use, depending on type of hormone and length of therapy, and body mass index have previously been related to an increased risk of breast cancer.16–18 Unlike the present study, several previous studies have reported a protective effect of physical activity on breast cancer risk.19,20 The physical activity measure 1Adjusted for age, body mass index, physical activity, alcohol consumption, tobacco smoking, education, stress, and time of day for blood draw.–2The analysis included both users and nonusers of postmenopausal hormones. included in the present study was based on a single question on current recreational physical activity and may therefore not have been sufficient to capture lifetime physical activity or even current activity in required details.
Our data lend support to the existence of a hormonal mechanism for the observed relations between modifiable risk factors and breast cancer risk. Few previous studies have evaluated the relation of breast cancer risk factors with plasma levels of estrogens, and many of them have been small in size. Similar to our results, moderately higher plasma levels of estrogens have previously been reported among women who drink alcohol compared to abstainers.21,22 Also, a positive association between adiposity and plasma estrogen levels has been reported rather consistently in previous studies.18,21,23,24 The aromatization of androgens to estrogens is the primary source of estrogen in postmenopausal women, and this conversion occurs predominantly in adipose tissue, which may explain the consistent findings. The results of a large pooled analysis including 624 case and 1,669 control subjects supported a positive association between body mass index and estrogen concentrations.18 Similarly, another study based on 217 postmenopausal women from the Nurses Health Study also found a strong positive correlation between body mass index and plasma estrogens and a modest positive correlation between alcohol intake and plasma estrone sulfate levels.21 The association between physical activity and plasma estrogen levels has not previously been evaluated in a population sample, to our knowledge.
The large sample size and the long follow-up of the Copenhagen City Heart Study ensured sufficient statistical power to assess breast cancer risk among a subset of women with a low risk factor profile. Linkage of civil registry numbers to nationwide population-based registers enabled identification of virtually all cases of breast cancer and allowed for nearly complete long-term followup. Information on plasma estrogen levels in a large subset of the women allowed us to evaluate the hypothesized hormonal pathway between the modifiable risk factors and breast cancer risk.
The reported benefits of low risk were almost certainly underestimates due to both misclassifications of the measurements that apply to each individual risk factor as well as lack of data on diet, which may also be an important modifiable risk factor for breast cancer.25
We did not have information on important biological risk factors for breast cancer, such as family history of breast cancer, age at menarche, and age at first birth. However, to confound the analyses, these factors would have to also be related to the modifiable risk factors. Experience of breast cancer in a near relative may have resulted in a higher awareness of risk factors for breast cancer, and if anything, we would expect women with a family history of breast cancer to consume less alcohol, be more reluctant to the use of hormones, and maybe also be more motivated to engage in physical activity. This would attenuate the true relation between risk factor profile and breast cancer risk, and confounding from these factors are therefore unlikely to explain our results. Furthermore, we find it unlikely that neither age at menarche nor age at first birth would be strongly associated with any of the risk factors later in life.
Estradiol has intrinsic biological variability,26 which may have decreased the reliability of a single measurement of hormonal levels and may have blurred possibly stronger associations between the risk factors and plasma estrogen levels. Even though we found very little circadian variability in mean estrogen levels in the present study, sampling at a specific time or several samples from each individual would have been preferable. On the other hand, such an approach would have been much more time consuming and expensive and would not have been feasible to accomplish in a large population study such as the one at hand. Also, a previous study has found correlations for 2–3 years between replicate measures of plasma estrogen levels to be quite high, making a single measurement relatively reliable.27
The blood samples were first assayed more than 20 years after collection. During this period they have been stored at 220 C. Steroid hormones, in general, seem to be relatively stable over time at this temperature28 and we do not expect this time span to have seriously distorted our internal comparisons of hormone levels between risk factor categories. However, because of the longterm storing, a higher proportion of the sex steroid hormones may be in an unbound form compared to other studies.29
The results of the present study suggest that a population-wide public health strategy to increase the prevalence of women with a low risk factor profile could substantially reduce the numbers of new breast cancer cases and thus be relevant in the effort to end the breast cancer epidemic. Implementing such modifications in life style factors would of course require efforts in health education and policy.
The authors thank the staff and the participants of the Copenhagen City Heart Study. Ms. Inge Christiansen is acknowledged for the laboratory analysis. This study was supported by funds from the Danish Cancer Society and the Lundbeck Foundation.
Ethical approval: The Danish ethics committee for the City of Copenhagen and Frederiksberg approved the study (# 01-144/01).
All participants gave written informed consent.
