Objective The aim of this study was to investigate the association between the content of marine n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) in adipose tissue, a biomarker for the long-term intake of seafood, and the subsequent development of breast cancer (BC). Design We designed a case-cohort study based on a cohort of healthy Danish women, who in the 1990s donated adipose tissue biopsies to a biobank in order to investigate the role of diet for the development of cancer and chronic disease. During follow-up, incident cases of BC were identified through national registries, and the content of n-3 PUFA in adipose tissue was compared between cases and the cohort sample. Results During follow-up, 463 new cases of BC were identified. After adjusting for potential confounders, no significant association between the content of marine n-3 PUFA and BC was found. When comparing the highest with the lowest quintile, the hazard ratio (HR) was 0.96 (95% CI 0.64-1.43) for total marine n-3 PUFA, 0.84 (95% CI 0.58-1.23) for eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and 1.08 (95% CI 0.73-1.58) for docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). Conclusion This study does not indicate any association between the content of total or individual marine n-3 PUFA in adipose tissue and development of BC.
Breast cancer (BC) is the most common malignant disease in women in the Western world. The recent report by the World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research suggests that cancer generally can be reduced by one-third by lifestyle changes like an appropriate diet, increased physical activity, and avoidance of obesity . Ecological and epidemiological studies have focused on diet as a risk factor for BC, in particular, the intake of fat among postmenopausal women . The incidence of BC varies widely throughout the world, with the lowest incidences in Asia and the highest in the Western world . Migration studies, however, show that Asian women moving to the US rapidly adopt the Western risk pointing to the importance of environmental factors for BC . The intake of fat and fatty acids, particularly the marine n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) found primarily in fatty fish, also vary around the world with the highest intake in Asia and in Arctic areas, and the lowest in the Western countries . A third marine n-3 PUFA exists, docosapentaenoic acid (DPA), but there are no data on the role of this fatty acid in humans. In the laboratory setting, studies on cell lines and on animals have shown promising results by down regulating BC tumor growth when introducing n-3 PUFA as a nutrient . Results from case–control and cohort studies in women are, however, inconclusive, with some studies showing no relationship, others a protective effect and a few, a higher risk of BC associated with a high intake of fish . Problems with extrapolating information from experimental studies to epidemiological settings may relate to the indirect assessments of n-3 PUFA intake based on food questionnaires . The use of biomarkers may provide a more accurate and objective measurement of the habitual diet, and in this aspect, adipose tissue is of particular interest. The content of marine n-3 PUFA in adipose tissue reflects the dietary intake of these fatty acids during the past several months, whereas in blood cells it only reflects the intake during the last weeks . The aim of this study was to evaluate the content of marine n-3 PUFA in adipose tissue, as a long-term indicator for the intake of marine n-3 PUFA, on the incidence of BC. No cohort study based on adipose tissue biopsies have, to our knowledge, been published before. Our hypothesis was that a high content of marine n-3 fatty PUFA in adipose tissue would be associated with a lower risk of developing BC.
The Danish study population ‘‘Diet, Cancer and Health’’ has been described in detail elsewhere . The participants were all born in Denmark, aged 50–64 at study entry, and not registered with a previous diagnosis of cancer in the Danish Cancer Registry. A total of 29,875 women accepted the invitation, corresponding to 37.1% of those who were invited. The participants filled in questionnaires on food and lifestyle, and biological material was collected together with anthropometrical data. The biological materials (urine, fat tissue biopsies, and blood samples) were stored at -150 C, as a biobank, to be used later on in future studies. During follow-up, the participants filled in an additional questionnaire and for updated information on vital status and migration the cohort members were linked to the Central Population Register (CPR). Information on disease development during follow-up has continuously been obtained by linkage to different disease registries. All linkages were performed by use of the personal identification number, which is allocated to all persons residing in Denmark.
Incident cases of BC in the cohort were identified by a combination of information from three national registries in Denmark, namely, the Danish Cancer Registry (DCR), the Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group (DBCG), and the Pathology Bank, to make the identification as complete as possible. Founded in 1977, DBCG provides national guidelines for BC treatment and is responsible for nationwide randomised, controlled trials. About 90% of all Danish patients with BC are registered in a database under the responsibility of DBCG and information on diagnosis, pathology and treatment is available from this database. During follow-up, cohort members have been followed for BC occurrence from date of entry, i.e., date of visit to the study center until the date of cancer diagnosis, date of death, date of emigration or April 24, 2006, the chosen censoring date in this study, whichever came first. BC was diagnosed in 1,074 women during the follow-up period, i.e., 3.6% of the women. As some adipose tissue biopsies from early incident cases in the cohort (from 1993 until approx 2000) were used in an earlier study , we defined January 1, 2001, as a new date for start of follow-up including all incident BC cases in the cohort during this period (n = 574). The median follow-up time was 4.8 years (range 3.6–7.1). We decided to include only women with invasive ductal or lobular carcinoma excluding cases with rare histology, where the results could be confounded by a strong etiological factor, also to focus on the most common forms of BC (about 95% of all BC). Other exclusion criteria were prior cancer diagnosis to BC registered in the DCR (other than benign skin cancer), missing food frequency questionnaire, missing information on smoking, physical activity, education, body fat composition, alcohol intake, age at first child, parity, body mass index (BMI), benign breast surgery, and hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Finally, some of the adipose tissue biopsies were too small for fatty acid analysis.
In view of the large cohort and in order to economize with the resources from the biobank, we used a case–cohort design in our study. A random sample of women with an available adipose tissue biopsy in the biobank and no prior BC diagnosis (n = 1,148) was drawn from the total cohort of women (n = 29,875) and their adipose tissue were analyzed in parallel with the cases.
Informed consent was obtained from all participants, including consent for the use of the biological material in future studies. The original study protocol for ‘‘Diet, Cancer and Health’’ was approved by the ethical committees in Copenhagen and Aarhus, and by the Danish Data Protection Agency. This study has been approved by the committees in a supplementary application.
An adipose tissue biopsy was taken from the buttock of the participants using a luer-lock system consisting of a needle, a venoject multisample luer adaptor, and an evacuated blood tube, according to the method of Beynen and Katan . The biopsies were primarily frozen at -20 C, and later on placed in liquid nitrogen (max -150 C) for longterm storage. For the analysis, in our study, the biopsies were transported by courier on dry ice to the Lipid Clinic at the Department of Cardiology at Aalborg Hospital from the biobank at The Danish Cancer Society in Copenhagen. Upon arrival to the laboratory, the biopsies were defrosted at room temperature and a sample of *2–4 mg was removed to a glass, and pre-warmed to 50 C for 10 min. The fat was dissolved in heptane at 50 C, and the fatty acids were trans-esterified by 2 M KOH (potassium hydroxide) in methanol at 50 C for 2 min according to IUPAC Standard Methods for Analysis of Oils, Fats an Derivatives .The fatty acid composition was analyzed by gas chromatography using a Varian 3900 GC with a CP-8400 auto sampler (Varian, Middelburg, Nederland) equipped with a flame ionization detector. Split injection mode, a CP-Sil 88, 60 m 9 0.25 mm ID capillary column (Varian, Middelburg, Nederland), temperature programming from 90 to 210 C and constant flow was used. Helium was used as carrier gas. Commercially available standards (Nu-Chek-Prep, Inc., Minnesota, USA) were used to identify the individual fatty acids. This approach permits quantification of fatty acids methyl esters with 12–24 carbon atoms, and separation and quantization of several trans fatty acids. The fatty acid content is presented as the percentage of total fatty acids.
We used a case–cohort design. A Cox proportional hazards model was used for the estimation of hazard ratios, as if the full cohort was included, modified by a weighting scheme described by Kalbfleisch and Lawless and using a robust variance estimate . In the case–cohort design, weights are assigned to each subject, one for cases and N/n for noncases in the subcohort, where N (n) is the number of noncases in the cohort (subcohort). Age was used as the time scale in the Cox regression model. Data were analyzed for the total content of marine n-3 PUFA and for EPA, DHA, and DPA separately. Outcome was defined as primary loco-regional BC (ductal and lobular), verified histological. In multivariable analyses, we adjusted the risk estimates for established risk factors for BC at baseline such as BMI (\20, 20–25, and 25 kg/m2), education (\8, 8–10, and 10 years in school), parity (0–6), age at first birth (continuous variable), age at menarche (\12, 12–14, 14, unknown), history of benign breast disease (yes/no/ unknown), HRT (never/former/current), moderate to vigorous physical activity (\30 min/day or C30 min/day), smoking (never, former, current, 1–14, 15–24, or 24 g tobacco/day), and alcohol intake (continuous variable). Missing information on one or more of the confounders leads to exclusion from the statistical analysis. Analyses were done using Stata version 10.1 (Stata Corporation, College Station, TX, USA).
After elimination due to missing adipose tissue, missing information on confounders and food habits, and invalid histological diagnosis, and adjusting for the new inclusion date, 463 cases remained and 1,098 women were included in the subcohort (including 16 cases as a result of the chosen design).
Of the 463 cases included in this study (Table 1), 51% had a lumpectomy, 86% ductal carcinomas, 65% tumors less than 2 cm, 51% were node negative, and 84% estrogen receptor positive. Table 2 shows the baseline characteristics of the 463 Table cases compared with the cohort (n = 27,250) and the subcohort. Median age at entry was 61 years. Well-known risk factors for BC incidence were distributed in the groups of women as expected, i.e., with an higher age at first childbirth, higher intake of alcohol, more current HRT users, and higher rates of benign breast tumor surgery among cases. Other known risk factors such as age at menarche, level of education and exercise were distributed equally in the groups, while BMI was lower among cases. Table 3 summarizes the distribution of individual fatty acids levels among cases and in the subcohort. The major fatty acids in the adipose tissue biopsies were 18:1n-9 (oleic acid), 16:0 (palmitic acid), 18:2n-6 (linoleic acid), and 18:0 (stearic acid) accounting for *77% of all the fatty acids present. Marine n-3 PUFA (EPA, DPA, and DHA) represented a minor part of fatty acids in adipose tissue, less than 1% of total fatty acids. After adjusting for known risk factors of BC (Table 4), there was a non-significant protective role of EPA, DPA, DHA, and total marine n-3 PUFA, the adjusted hazard ratio (HR) for EPA being 0.84 (95% CI 0.58–1.23) comparing the highest quintile with the lowest. Similarly, there were no clear trends when comparing the n-3 PUFA by quintiles. The multivariable analysis did not show any association between total n-6 PUFA and BC (data not shown). Clinical characteristics In this study, we investigated the association between the content of n-3 PUFA in adipose tissue and the development of BC. To our knowledge, this is the first study based on a prospective design where adipose tissue marine n-3 PUFA have been used as biomarkers for the intake of marine n-3 PUFA. We could, however, not demonstrate a protective role of EPA, DHA, DPA, or total marine n-3 PUFA. Several biochemical mechanisms have been proposed whereby n-3 PUFA may inhibit carcinogenesis have been proposed: (1) a shift in the synthesis of eicosanoids to a more anti-inflammatory pattern instead of a pro-inflammatory state, (2) down regulation of estrogen synthesis, (3) modulation of n (%) insulin sensitivity, (4) modulation of gene expression and activity of signal molecules involved in growth, differentiation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and metastasis, and (5) modulating membrane fluidity, thereby modulating the activity of different receptors anchored in the cell membranes . So far, the literature has not confirmed this possible protective role of marine n-3 PUFA on the risk of developing BC. While some epidemiological and experimental studies have indicated an anti-carcinogenic effect, others have been inconclusive and some even shown a positive association between dietary intake of fish and BC . There may be several explanations for this apparent discrepancy such as study design, source of exposure information, level of exposure in the study population, potentially critical time periods of exposure, and modification by other factors. A meta-analysis of biomarkers of dietary fatty acids and the risk of BC , including twelve case–control and cohort studies, demonstrated the importance of study design with cohort studies showing a significant protective effect of total n-3 PUFA, whereas the case–control studies revealed no risk reduction. A previous study based on the same Danish cohort showed a positive association between the intake of fish and the incidence of estrogen receptor–positive (ER?) BC tumors among postmenopausal women . The incidence rate ratio (IRR) per additional 25 g of mean daily intake of fish was 1.14 (CI 1.03–1.26) for ER? BC, and 1.00 (CI 0.81– 1.24) for estrogen receptor–negative (ER-) BC. The data were based on information from food questionnaires and self-reported fish intake and may thus have been influenced by information bias. Another plausible explanation for the positive association might be the influence of other substances in fish, including organometallics and pesticides, that may override a true inverse association between fish oil and BC. More recent biomarker studies (erythrocytes) from Japan and China, both case–control studies, have shown a significant protective effect of EPA and DHA for the development of BC . The intake of fish in these two populations is much higher than in European populations. The fatty acid composition of blood components reflects a short-term measure for fish consumption and is more susceptible to temporary changes in lifestyle. In addition, they are likely to be influenced by metabolic changes that may occur during the development of a malignant tumor. Adipose tissue as we used in this study reflects a more longterm exposure . In general, subjects mainly maintain the same dietary habits through adult life, and the use of fatty acid composition of adipose tissue instead of blood components should give a more stable and reliable estimate of long-term dietary habits, The adipose tissue biopsy may give a better representation of the endogen fatty acid environment the epithelial cells of the breast are exposed to over long term, though it is possible that adipose tissue in the breast is more susceptible to dietary changes than gluteal adipose tissue . BC is a disease presumed to have a long latency between exposure and development of cancer. Critical periods of exposure may be the early teenage years and around pregnancy, where the terminal differentiation of the mammary gland takes place . Adipose tissue biopsies from these two periods of life could contribute with more information on the influence of diet and fatty acids on BC incidence. The strengths of our study are that it is population based and prospective with a relative long follow-up period. Information of outcome was based on reliable and population-based registries. The diagnosis of BC was validated by reviewing all pathology reports in all cases and this information compared with that from the other national registries.
However, there are limitations too. The participants in the ‘‘Diet, Cancer and Health’’ cohort differ from nonparticipants in several aspects, e.g., by an under-representation of lower socioeconomic status . If women of low socioeconomic status had a higher consumption of fish, we may have underestimated a true association. By not having access to biopsies from women developing BC early during Saturates 14:00 16:00 18:00
Totala Monosaturates 16:1n-7 18:1n-9
Totalb n-6 PUFAs 18:2n-6 20:4n-6
Totalc n-3 PUFAs 18:3n-3 20:5n-3 22:5n-3 22:6n-3
Totald Trans-fatty acids
Totale 2.72 (0.47) 19.27 (1.95) 3.19 (0.92) 26.33 (2.92) 7.05 (1.52) 44.32 (1.88) 55.06 (2.86) 10.86 (1.95) 0.39 (0.10) 11.84 (2.00) 0.82 (0.16) 0.10 (0.05) 0.29 (0.09) 0.29 (0.13) 1.56 (0.32) 2.34 (0.43) the follow-up time, we were unable to estimate a potential short-term effect on the risk of developing BC. Probably, the most important limitation lies in the relative low content of marine n-3 PUFA, less than 1% of the total fatty acids in the biopsies. This may reflect a low intake of fish among Danish women compared with the populations in Asia. Also, it reduces the statistical power of the study to detect an association, especially if such an association is weak.
There are still unanswered questions regarding the influence of n-3 PUFA on BC risk and how to investigate this appropriately. In this study, we have focused on marine n-3 PUFA as potential protective agents but perhaps a more appropriate assay would be to examine the lipid profile of the patients, the ‘‘lipidome,’’ in parallel to genomics and proteomics . In conclusion, this prospective study did not show a protective effect of marine n-3 PUFA on the risk of developing BC. Future studies should investigate whether a possible protective role of marine n-3 PUFA is restricted to subgroups of tumors and also explore lipid–gene interactions .
Acknowledgments This study was supported by grants from The Danish Cancer Society.
