Relationshipsbetween menstrual factors and breast cancer risk were investigated in a prospective study of 63,090 Norwegian women. A total of 1565 cases of breast cancer occurred during follow-up from 1961 through 1980. The risk of breast cancer decreased with increasing age at menarche (P= 0.06) and increased with increasing age at menopause (P= 0.005) in analyses adjusted for age, urban/rural place of residence, parity, and age at first and last birth. The results correspond to an average increase in breast cancer risk of 4.0%for each year of decrease in age at menarche, and an increase in risk of 3.6%for each year of increase in age at menopause. The protective effect of early menopause was strongest for breast cancer diagnosed in patients 80 years of age or older. No clear relationship was seen between menstrual irregularities and breast cancer risk.
From 1956 through 1959, all women 20 to 69 years of age by January 1, 1956, in four counties in Norway were invited to attend a screening program for early diagnosis of breast cancer. Each woman was interviewed according to a standard questionnaire and had a clinical breast examination camed out by a physician. In addition to demographic data, the questionnaire elicited information on different reproductive variables (it?., age at menarche and menopause, number of full-term pregnancies, age at first and last birth, number of abortions, and duration of lactation). Age at menarche and menopause was defined as age at first and last menstruation, respectively.
The current study was confined to residents of the three counties of Vestfold, Aust-Agder, and Nord-Tr~ndelag who were 27 to 69 years of age by January 1, 1956 (total, 92,573 women). The official personal registration number was retrieved for 85,063 women who were still alive at the start of follow-upon January 1,1961. Of these women, 63,090 had attended the screening program and were interviewed during the years 1956 through 1959, correspondingto an overallresponse rate of 74.2%in this group. The response rate was higher in the younger age groups, in rural areas, among people occupied in farming or forestry, and in Nord-Trrandelag where the screening program was offered three times (Table 1).
The official registration number served as a unique identification of each woman's record and was used to link follow-up information to our files. Thus, data on cancer cases (obtained from the Cancer Registry of Norway) and complete information concerning emigration and death (obtained from the Central Bureau of Statistics) could be added to the records with information on reproductive variables. Dates of diagnosis and sites of primary tumor were checked thoroughly by the Cancer Registry, and these variables and the histologic subtype recorded were not revised for this study. The Cancer Registry covers the whole population of Norway and the registration is practically complete for almost all sites, including breast c a n ~ e r T.~he follow-up period extended from January 1, 1961, to December 31,1980. Thus, cancer cases diagnosed at screening in 1956 through 1959 (60 cases) and those representing an earlier history of breast cancer (140 women) were not included in the study. Data on height and weight were linked to our files for 63,086 women who also attended a screening program organized by the National Mass Radiography Service from 1963 through 1975.
The analyses of incidence of breast cancer were adjusted for age at start of follow-up (with 5-year age groups) and urban/rural place of residence, and in special cases, reproductive factors other than the variable studied. Thus, parity was considered with six categories (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and r 5 ) , and age at first and last birth with five Categories each (correspondingto 5-year intervals). The adjustment was made by forming a stratum for each combination of categoriesof the covariables. A test for trend in association was carried out by the stratifiedextension of the CochranArmitage statistk6Relative odds were estimated by stratified logistic regression analyses7on scores depending on age at menarche or age at menopause, respectively. The percentage increase in breast cancer risk per year decrease in age at menarche or per year increase in age at menopause could be estimated from the slopesof the regression lines. A test for departure from trend allowed assessment of the appropriateness of the model.
Of the 63,090 participants, 14,216 died and 126 emigrated in the period 1961 through 1980. In the estimation procedure, a crude correction for censoring was introduced by decreasingthe initial number at risk by half the number of deaths and emigrations occurring among those in whom breast cancer did not develop. The calculations also included a test for interactionbetween the study variable and the separate variables defining ~ t r a t a T.~he expected numbers of cases in the various categories under the hypothesis of no association were derived in analyses adjusted for times until censoring. These numbers also were incorporated in the calculation of two-tailed P values for linear trend. Strata without cancer cases, or in which all participantswere at the same level of the study variable, provided no information and were deleted. For this reason and because of missing values, the number of women included may vary according to the degree of stratification in the statistical analyses.
In analyses involving age at menopause, only 22,15 1 participants who had passed menopause at the time of interview and reported their age at menopause could be included. Of these women, 1491 reported unilateral or bilateral oophorectomy, other operations on the ovaries, or hysterectomy, and the main analyses were limited to the remaining 20,660 women.
Table 1 shows the distribution of age at menarche over categories defined by demographic variables. Age at menarche decreased in successive years of birth. The lowest age at menarche was observed in rural areas, in the county of Nord-Trmdelag, and among professional workers, but differencesaccording to place of residence and occupation * Relative odds estimates according to age at diagnosis, adjusted for age at start of follow-upand urban/rural place of residence. t Two-tailed P values: 0.01 < P 5 0.05.
t: Two-tailed P values: 0.001 < P I 0.0 1. were small. Ever married women were younger at menarche than never married women. Complete information on age at menopause was obtained only for participants born in 1900 or earlier, and the distribution of age at menopause showed little variation among different subgroups according to demographic variables. One thousand five hundred sixty-five cases of breast cancer were diagnosed during follow-up among the 63,090 women who attended the screening program. One thousand five hundred twenty-eight cases occurred among the 6 1,361 women who reported age at menarche.
We observed a significantdecrease in breast cancer risk with increasing age at menarche (Table 2). The relative odds estimate was 0.96 per year of increase in age at menarche, in logistic regression analyses with adjustment for age at start of follow-upand urban/rural place of residence. Adjustments for panty and age at first and last birth did not influence this estimate, which corresponds to an average increase in breast cancer risk per year decrease in age at menarche of 4.0%.Women who were 17 years of age or older at menarche had somewhat higher breast cancer risk than women who were 16 years of age at menarche. The departurefrom a linear trend was not, however, statistically significant.
Five hundred eighty cases of breast cancer occurred among the 20,660 postmenopausal women who reported age at natural menopause. The association with age at menopause was highly significant. The relative odds estimate per 5-year increase in age at menopause was 1.19 in logistic regression analysis with adjustment for age, urban-rural place of residence, panty, and age at first and last birth (Table 3). This estimate corresponds to an average increase in breast cancer risk of 3.6%per year increase in age at menopause. For the 44 cases diagnosed among 1491 women who had reported unilateral or bilateral oophorectomy, other operations involving the ovaries, and/or hysterectomy, we observed an odds ratio of 1.25 per 5-year increase in age at menopause (95% confidence interval, 0.90 to 1.74).
The effects of age at menarche and age at menopause were still obtained in analyses with additional adjustment for occupation, body mass index (weight/height*), or height. Age at menarche and age at menopause were not correlated in our cohort, and adjustment for either factor did not alter the effect of the other. The effect of age at menarche was similar for breast cancers diagnosed at different ages, whereas age at menopause had the strongest effect for cancers diagnosed in women 80 years of age or older (Table 4). The relative odds estimate for women reporting irregular menstruation versus other women was 0.93 in analyses with adjustment for parity and age at menarche (95%confidence interval 0.74 to 1.16).
Of all breast cancer cases included in this study, 98% were verified by histologic examination. The classification into histologic subtypes was based on information reported to the Cancer Registry by pathologists in many different laboratories. Thus, it is rather crude. Despite some variation in risk estimatesbetween subtypes, we observed no significant heterogeneity, neither with regard to age at menarche nor age at menopause.
It should be noticed that most women in the younger part of the cohort were premenopausal at the time of interview. In the younger age groups, therefore, women with an early menopause would be overrepresented among participants who reported their age at menopause. This will not, in itself, introduce any bias when we study the dependence of cancer risk on age at menopause, provided that age at the start of follow-up is properly adjusted for and that the logistic model holds in all age strata. Thus, results based on analyses with more detailed adjustment for age at the start of follow-up did not differ essentially from the main results with adjustment for age in 5-year groups, nor did results from analyses restricted to women 60 years of age or older at the start of follow-up.
Our results point to definite associations between age at menarche and age at menopause and breast cancer risk that may reflect causal relationships with hormonal changes occurring at these points in life. However, the associations also could arise because of correlations with different determinants of the disease, e.g.,factors related to socioeconomic class or other reproductive variables.
Finally, the possibility of bias in study design should be considered.
MENSTRUAFLACTORASND BREASTCANCER .
In a follow-up study, we avoid problems such as selection and recall bias, which may distort results in casecontrol studies. Age at menarche is influenced by childhood socioeconomic conditions, and early menarche may indicate a particular childhood environment related to long-term increase in risk of breast cancer, independent of hormonal effects. However, the associations with age at menarche and age at menopause were still found after adjustment for occupation, body mass index, or height.
Thus, it seems unlikely that the associations observed in our study can be due to bias or confounding with other risk factors.
Our analyses of the effect of age at menarche on breast cancer risk showed a rather smooth trend with decreasing risk for increasing age at menarche from 13 to 16 years.
However, the women with menarche before 13 years of age had a somewhat lower risk, and those with menarche after 16 years of age had higher risk than predicted by the linear trend. For those with late menarche, similar results were observed for cancer of the uterine c ~ r p u sA. l~though the departure from trend was not statistically significant, these results may reflect hormonal disturbance among women with very late menarche. They support the contention that absence of menstruation beyond the 16th year should be considered abnormal. Thus, ovarian disease is found in a large proportion of women with primary amenorrhea.’
Our results regarding age at menarche are consistent with findings from other prospective studies”-12 and a large international case-control study.l3 However, some studies have found no relationship between age at menarche and breast cancer risk. In a number of case-control studies, the mean age at menarche was only slightly less among women with breast cancer than among controls.
More recent reports have not been entirely consistent.
Some have indicated a general protective effect of late menarche,I4-l7 whereas others have not.18-19 Certain studies have shown a definite protectiveeffect among premenopausal women only,2°-22supporting previousreports of a stronger effect premenopausally and perimenopausally than in postmenopausal women.’ However, there also have been studies showing a decreased risk for postmenopausal breast cancer 0nly.23-24In our data, the suggested protective effect of late menarche seemed to be independent of age at breast cancer diagnosis (Table 4).
The failure to identify an effect of age at menarche, especially in case-control studies, may be related to inaccurate recall. However, there are data suggesting that recall of age at menarche is reasonably accurate.25Nevertheless, this problem might explain the lack of association seen in some studies, especially for older breast cancer patients. Furthermore, as the effect of age at menarche is likely to be weak, one should not expect statistically significant results in small studies. Thus, the current cumulative evidence definitely suggests that early age at menarche is a risk factor for breast cancer, both in premenopausal and postmenopausal years.
A history of menstrual irregularities was not strongly associated with breast cancer risk. Women reporting irregular menstruation had somewhat decreased risk. This finding was not statistically significant, but is consistent with previous observations from Finland26and Italy” suggesting that women with irregular cycles may be at reduced risk. In a Swedish study,28a deficit in long cycles was observed among women with breast cancer. To the extent that menstrual irregularities indicate anovulatory cycles, these results are consistent with the hypothesis that regular ovulatory cycles may increase breast cancer risk.”
Our data support previous reports of a protective effect of early menopause~l,14,16,20,2~,30.3~Some s t ~ d i e s h~av~e- ~ ~ indicated that this relationship may be strongest in older women, and our results confirm that the protective effect lasts until old age (Table 4). However, although the highest risk estimate was observed in the oldest age group, we found no consistent trend towards a stronger protective effect with increasing age at diagnosis. Because information on age at menopause was obtained 2 to 5 years before the start of follow-up, it was not possible to investigate the effect of menopause for cancer occurring in perimenopausal women.
Only 169 of the women with known age at menopause reported surgical removal of both ovaries. Thus, we could not adequately study the effect of age at artificial menopause on the risk of breast cancer. The estimate of the association with age at menopause in the group of 1491 women who reported unilateral or bilateral oophorectomy, other operations involving the ovaries, and/or hysterectomy, was similar to the effect among the women with natural menopause shown in Table 3.
The association with age at menopause was highly significant and seemed stronger than the effect of age at menarche, but this may be due to the larger range of variation in years for menopause. Our relative odds estimates imply an increase in breast cancer risk per year decrease in age at menarche equal to 4.0%. The correspondingincrease in risk per year increase in age at menopause is 3.6%.These figuresare, however, subject to large sampling errors. The 95%confidence intervals for the estimates associated with age at menarche and age at menopause were 0.0% to 8.2% and 1.1% to 6.0%, respectively. Thus, although the effects of one additional year of menstrual activity on the risk of postmenopausal breast cancer seems to be of the same order of magnitude at the start and end of the reproductive period, our results also are consistent with substantial differences in effect.
Our estimate of the effect of age at menopause agrees with recent results of Hiatt and Fireman3' who observed that for every year earlier the menstruation ceased, a woman's risk of breast cancer was reduced by 3.0%.Average estimates per year have not been reported in other studies, but from the relative risks given, most studies seem to have found somewhat stronger effect of the order of 5% to 6% per year of difference in age at natural menopause.14,1622,323 case-control study, Henderson et al.45found that breast cancer patients established regular cycles significantly earlier than controls. Data from a study by MacMahon et al.46suggest that the high breast cancer risk in women with early menarche is most likely explained by both a longer duration and a higher level of exposureto estrogens experienced by these women. Women with a late menopause are exposed to normal endogenous estrogen and progesterone for a longer time period than women with early menopause, and also may experience a larger number of anovulatory cycles4' resulting in a lack of cyclic progesterone. However, whereas the evidence linking estrogens to risk of breast cancer is abundant, the role of progesterone in the cause of breast cancer is less clear.47
In conclusion, our data support previous reports of an inverse association of breast cancer risk with age at menarche and a positive association with age at menopause, The results are consistent with the hypothesis that the effects of these variables are due to their contribution to the overall duration of menstrual activity, which determines the duration of exposure to high levels of ovarian hormones. These effects may, in particular, depend on the total lifetime number of ovulatory cycles.
On the basis of a mathematical model, which gave a good prediction of age-specificincidence curves in different populations, Moolgavkar et al.34found that an age at menarche of 10 years carried a twofold risk over an age at menarche of 16 years. Similarly, menopause at 52 years of age was predicted to carry a twofold risk over menopause at 42 years of age. These estimates correspond to an increase in risk of 12% per year decrease in age at menarche, and 7% increase in risk per year increase in age at menopause. Most studies, including our own, have found weaker effects. If the assumptions in the model are correct, this discrepancy might indicate inaccurate recall, which would tend to weaken observed relationships, especially for menarche.
A relationship between the total number of years of menstrual activity and risk of breast cancer has been reported p r e v i ~ u s l y . I~t ~h,a~s ~been proposed that breast REFERENCES cancer risk may be directly related to the total number of 1. Thomas DB. Epidemiology and related studies of breast cancer sterile menstrual cycles, and that the effect of various re- etiology. In: Lilienfeld AM, ed. Reviews in Cancer Epidemiology, vol. productive factors could be explained by their contribu- 1. 2N.ewKvYlloerkG:,EHlseeuvciehr/IN,EoirdtheHGoEll.aAndp,ro1s9p8e0cti1v5e3-s2tu1d7.y of reproductive tion towards a reduction in the number of such cycles.37 factorsand breast cancer:I. Parity.Am JEpidemioll987; 126:831-841. Our results regarding menarche and menopause are con- 3. Kvlle G, Heuch I. A prospective study of reproductivefactorsand sistent with this theory. However, the protective effect of b8r4e2a-s8t5c0a.ncer: 11. Age at first and last birth. Am J Epidemiot 1987; 126: a pregnancy seems to be stronger than expected under 4. Kvile G, Heuch I. Lactation and cancer risk: Is there a relation this hypothesis. Thus, from the relative risk estimates of specificto breast cancer?J Epidemiol CommunityHealth 1988;42:30the effect of parity,' we found that each new full-term 375. . Lund E. Pilot study forthe evaluation of completenessof reporting pregnancy resulted in a reduction in breast cancer risk of to the Cancer Registry. In: Incidence of Cancer in Norway 1978. Oslo: 16%.Further, the age when a pregnancy occurs and the Cancer Registry of Norway, 1981; 11-14. length of intervals between pregnancies may be impor- of 6th. eMMaanntetellN-H.Caehni-zseqluparroecteesdtusrwe.itJhAomneSdteagtrAeesosofcfre1e9d6o3m;5:8E:6x9te0n-7s0io0n.s tant.3 There is still no general agreement on the effect of 7. Thomas DG, Gart JJ. Stratifiedtrend and homogeneity analyses lactation on breast cancer risk.4 However, a simple rela- of proportions and life table data. Comput Biomed Res 1983; 16:116tionship explained by the duration of postpartum ame- 1286.. Kvlle G, Heuch I, Ursin G. Reproductive Factors and Risk of norrhoea, which correlates well with the duration of lac- Cancer of the Uterine Corpus. A ProspectiveStudy. Bergen: University t a t i ~ ns,e~em~s unlikely. Thus, we strongly recommend of Bergen, 1988. that each reproductive variable be studied separately. Wi9l.soRnoJsDs,GFTo.sDteirsDorWde,resdosf.thWeiollviaamry'sanTdexfetbmoaolke roefpErondduoccrtiivnoeltoragcyt,.eIdn:. Analyses of such indices as total number of sterile men- 7. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1985; 206-258. strual cycles may conceal, rather than disclose, important 10. ShapiroS, GoldbergJ, Venet L et al. Risk factorsin breast cancer. associations. IAntperroascptieocntisvien sthtuedEyt.ioIlno:gDyoolflCRa,ncVeor dinopMijaanI.,Leydos.n:HIAosRtCE,n1v9i7ro3n;m16e9n-t
Associations with early menarche and late menopause 182. have been previously related to a higher frequency of an- 11. Tulinius H, Day NE, Johannesson G et al. Reproductivefactors ovulatory cycle^.^^,^ However, Wallace et al.41observed and12r.iskFafroerwberlelaVstTc,aMncaetrhinBI,cMelaanthd. MIn.t TJhCeacnocmerb1in9e7d8;e2ff1e:c7t2o4f-7b3r0e.ast that women with early menarche established a pattern of cancer risk factors. Cancer 1977; 40931-936. regular cycle intervals more promptly than women with 13. MacMahon B, Cole P. The ovarian etiology of human breast canlate menarche did, and early onset of ovulatory cycles has sceearr.cIhn:: CGurrurnednmtParnonblEe,mTsuinlinthiuesEHpi,deemd~ioR.loegcyenotfRCeasnucltesrianndCaLnycmerpRhoe-been observed in women with early r n e n a r ~ h e . ~In~a- ~ ~ mas. New York Springer-Verlag, 1972; 185-192.
