Introduction It has been suggested that both moderateand vigorous-intensity physical activity reduces the risk of breast cancer. However, the effect of moderate-intensity physical activity on breast cancer risk has not been consistently evaluated by menopausal status and has not been evaluated in Mexican women. Objective To evaluate the effect of moderate-intensity physical activity (h/week and MET-h/week) on the risk of breast cancer by menopausal status in Mexican women. Methods A population-based case-control study was conducted in Mexico. One thousand incident cases and 1,074 matched controls to cases by 5 years of age, site and health institution participated in the study. Women provided information on health, diet and physical activity by means of an in-person interview. Anthropometric measurements and blood samples were obtained from all women. A conditional logistic regression model was used to assess this association.
Results Participating in moderate-intensity physical activity decreased the risk of BC in both pre- and postmenopausal women (OR = 0.96; 95% CI 0.92.–0.99; OR = 0.90; 95% CI 0.86–0.93, respectively) for every 3 h per week of moderate-intensity physical activity. There was a statistically significant modification effect by menopausal status (p = 0.009).
Conclusions Strategies need to be identified that will engage women in physical activity programs.
The expert panel of the WCRF/American Institute for Cancer Research agrees that evidence shows physical activity protects against postmenopausal breast cancer, although evidence is still limited for premenopausal breast cancer . Since 1998, numerous publications have shown an inverse association between physical activity and breast cancer risk . An average 30–40% risk reduction has been reported when comparing the most physically active women with the least active; there is also evidence of a dose–response relationship . All types of physical activity have been associated with a reduction in breast cancer risk, but recreational activity has been more strongly associated than occupational or household activities. Moderate- and vigorous-intensity physical activities confer a nearly equal decrease in breast cancer risk . On average, Latina women spend more time on household physical activities than Caucasian women . These activities have been categorized as being moderate-intensity . In Mexico, only 16% of women exercise regularly and the national daily average of recreational physical activity for women is 5 min per day . In countries where women do not exercise regularly, studies about the effect of moderate-intensity physical activity on the risk of breast cancer should be performed in order to better understand its effect.
Studies on physical activity in premenopausal women, until as recently as 2003, have reported inconsistent results. Out of 20 studies (3 cohort studies and 17 case–control studies), six showed a statistically significant protective effect of some type of physical activity on the risk of breast cancer . Overall risk reductions were between 0.42 and 0.74; Bernstein et al. used hours spent in physical activity per week from menarche to 1 year prior to the patient’s diagnosis, Levi et al. used occupational and leisure time physical activity , while others assessed exercise sometime during adulthood .
In postmenopausal women, physical activity has been shown to decrease the risk of breast cancer more consistently through its effect on reducing both weight and insulin resistance . A recent study showed that the protective effect of physical activity on breast cancer risk after menopause was greater than the effect in premenopausal women . Nielson et al. provided an overview of three commonly proposed mechanisms relating physical activity to postmenopausal breast cancer risk, namely, overweight and obesity, insulin resistance and chronic inflammation. In this group of women, estrogen synthesis takes place mainly in the adipocytes; therefore, obesity increases the risk of breast cancer , and the conversion of androstenedione to estrone in fat tissue results in higher levels of endogenous estrogens, when compared to slim women . The effect of moderateintensity physical activity on breast cancer risk has not been consistently evaluated by menopausal status and has not been evaluated in Mexican women. Therefore, this study was conducted to evaluate the effect of moderateintensity physical activity (h/week and Met-h/week) on the risk of breast cancer by menopausal status in Mexican women.
A multicenter population-based case–control study was conducted in Mexico City, Monterrey, Veracruz and their metropolitan areas. All participants were pre- or postmenopausal women, between 35 and 69 years of age, living at one of the study sites for the past 5 years. One thousand cases and 1,074 controls were recruited.
Cases were identified by field staff at 12 hospitals from the major health care institutions in Mexico: the Mexican Institute of Social Security (Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, IMSS, six hospitals), the Social Security and Services Institute for State Employees (Instituto de Seguridad y Servicios Sociales de los Trabajadores del Estado, ISSSTE, two hospitals), and the Ministry of Health (Secretarı´a de Salud, SS, four hospitals).
The inclusion criteria for the cases included the following: (a) patients with a new histologically confirmed diagnosis of breast cancer, regardless of the stage of disease; (b) patients with no previous treatment such as radiotherapy, chemotherapy or antiestrogens such as tamoxifen during the previous 6 months; (c) patients who were not taking Aromasin (exemestane), Femara (letrozole), Arimidex (anastrozole) or Megace (megestrol) at the time of the study; and (d) patients who were not pregnant. Only two cases were using anti-estrogens and, therefore, were not included because we were interested in measuring breast density and antiestrogens could have modified it. Cases known to be HIV positive were excluded from the study.
Nurses from the field staff were based at each hospital Monday to Friday from January 2004 to December 2007. Eligible and consenting patients were generally interviewed close to their date of diagnosis (median = 3 days). The response rate for cases was high in all three sites (95.5% for Mexico City, 94.4% for Monterrey and 97.4% for Veracruz).
Controls were frequency-matched to the cases, according to 5-year age groups, membership to a health care institution and place of residence. Controls were selected based on a probabilistic multistage design. One or more basic geo-statistic areas (in Spanish, A´ rea Geoestad´ıstica Ba´sica, AGEB) were randomly selected considering the catchment area of each of the participating hospitals. Women were randomly sampled to provide specific numbers of women in each 5-year age category (35–39, 40–44, 45–49, 50–54, 55–59, 60–64 and 65–69 years) based on the age distribution of cases reported by the Mexican Tumor Registry in 2002. Study personnel visited the selected households and determined willingness to participate in the study. Women who agreed to participate signed an informed consent form and participated in a face-to-face interview. An appointment was scheduled for each woman to attend the hospital for anthropometric measurements, mammography and a blood sample. The response rate for controls was high in all three regions (87.4% for Mexico City, 90.1% for Monterrey, and 97.6% for Veracruz). Enrollment of both cases and controls took place between 2004 and 2007.
This collaborative study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the National Institute of Public Health and by equivalent committees at the collaborating hospitals.
Two probabilistic sampling strategies were used to select the controls.
For IMSS, the sample was obtained in two stages. The first-stage sample units were the AGEBs included in the catchment area of the institution. The second step was to explore the AGEB and to implement a screening questionnaire to identify women who met study eligibility criteria. Afterward, controls were selected by means of a simple random sampling in order to obtain as many women in the age group as were expected for the cases, according to the Mexican Tumor Registry age distribution in 2002. Only one woman was invited to participate from each household.
For ISSSTE and SS, the sampling strategy was developed in three stages. In the first stage, a county was selected with a proportional probability to the number of women claiming to belong to ISSSTE and SS. The second stage consisted of selecting AGEBs with the same proportional probability as mentioned earlier. The third stage was identical to the second stage for the IMSS.
Study subjects provided information about their health, physical activity and diet. The health questionnaire collected data on sociodemographic characteristics; reproductive factors (e.g., age at menarche and menopause, number of pregnancies, pregnancy outcomes, breastfeeding, menopausal status); use of oral contraceptives and hormone replacement therapy; family and individual history of chronic diseases (e.g., hypertension, diabetes mellitus, breast cancer); personal history of sexually transmitted diseases; history of body size, smoking, alcohol consumption; and history of X-ray and mammographic studies.
Diet information was obtained by asking women about food consumption the year prior to the onset of the symptoms, diet in the past year was assessed using a 104item semi-quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) adapted from Willett , to the Mexican population and validated in Mexico City . This questionnaire included 104 items and ten multiple choice frequency categories of consumption: 6 or more per day, 4– 5 per day, 2–3 per day, 1 per day, 5–6 per week, 2–4 per week, 1 per week, 1–3 per month, less than 1 per month and never. For each type of food, a commonly used unit or portion size (e.g., slice, glass or natural unit such as one apple) was specified, and women were asked how often they had consumed that amount of each food on average over the previous year. Nutrient intakes were computed by multiplying the frequency response by the nutrient content of specified portion sizes using Microsoft Office Access 2007. The database for calculating the nutrient intake took advantage of information from the US Department of Agriculture food composition tables , and it was complemented, when necessary, with a nutrient database developed by the National Institute of Nutrition in Mexico . This questionnaire has been previously validated against 24-h recalls in a sample of 134 women in Mexico City. The correlations between the food frequency questionnaires and the dietary records for total energy as well as for carbohydrate, protein and fat intake were 0.52, 0.57, 0.32 and 0.63, respectively .
To assess physical activity within the last 12 months, a semi-structure interview that estimates an individual’s time spent in physical activities (sleep, light-, moderateand vigorous-intensity) during a regular week was applied. For cases, physical activity preceding any breast cancer symptom was collected in order to reduce the possibility for reverse causation bias. Our questionnaire was designed based on the 7-day recall questionnaire proposed by Sallis et al. . Physical activity was divided into three categories: (a) light-intensity physical activities, those that require light physical effort and correspond to a consumption of 1.1–2.9 metabolic equivalents of energy expenditure (METS) (e.g., driving a car, sewing, laboratory work, reading a book and watching TV); (b) moderate-intensity physical activities, those that tire physically but do not make the person become out of breath and require a consumption of 3.0–5.9 METS (e.g., washing the car, painting a wall, packing and unpacking boxes, yoga, light cycling and stretching); and (c) vigorous-intensity physical activities, those that make the subject sweat, increase the heart beat and become out of breath, requiring a consumption of six or more METS (e.g., climbing stairs with heavy bags, moving heavy boxes, running and kick boxing). The number of hours of physical activity per week of each of the three categories was calculated adding a total of 168 h. Additionally, MET-hour per week was estimated for each woman by multiplying together the number of hours per week a woman spent in a particular activity and the estimated MET score for the activity based on the Compendium of Physical Activities .
A socioeconomic status (SES) index was defined based on belongings (i.e., gas or electric stove, water heating system, radio or cassette recorder, television, videocassette recorder, CD player, refrigerator, washing machine, microwave oven, blender, vacuum cleaner, water pump, motorcycle, car or van, land phone, cellular phone, computer and dish antenna). This index was constructed by means of principal components ; tertiles were generated based on distribution among controls.
Several characteristics were included in the analysis: history of breast cancer in first-degree relatives (grandmother, mother, sisters—yes/no), age at menarche (years), use of oral contraceptives (ever/never), parity (number of children born alive), breast feeding (months), history of diabetes (yes/no), hormone replacement therapy (yes/no), smoking (yes/no), menopausal status (pre-/postmenopause), body mass index (BMI = weight/height kg/m2) divided into quintiles, waist–hip ratio (WHR—quintiles), height (cm), alcohol consumption (yes/no) and total consumption of calories. Premenopausal women were those who reported less than 12 months since their last period and those with surgical menopause at 48 years or younger. Postmenopausal women were those with natural menopause (C12 months since their last period) and those with surgical menopause who reported bilateral oophorectomy or those who did not know the type of surgery but who were over 48 years, given that mean age at menopause in Mexican women is 48 years .
For comparisons between cases and controls, chi-square test for categorical variables and t-test or Wilcoxon test for continuous variables were used. To estimate the association between moderate-intensity physical activity and breast cancer risk, conditional logistic regression models were used (odd ratios OR and 95% confidence intervals CI). Analyses were conducted separately for pre- and postmenopausal women. Crude models were adjusted by design (5-year age group, health care institution membership and place of residence). All variables in Table 1 were evaluated as potential confounding factors; covariate inclusion was based on whether there was a C10% change in the variable coefficient of interest. Covariates that met this criterion were placed in the model simultaneously, and a backwardstepwise regression was done to determine the final model. Given that parity and breastfeeding were highly correlated (0.67; p \ 0.001), only parity was included in the model. Additionally, a multiplicative interaction between moderate-intensity physical activity (h/week and Met-h/week) and menopausal status was assessed. To evaluate dose– response, moderate-intensity physical activity (h/week and Met-h/week) was categorized in tertiles based on the distribution among the control group and partial F-test was performed for linear trend or heterogeneity. Statistical tests were two sided and p values \0.05 were considered statistically significant. Analyses were performed using Stata 9.0 (Stata Corporation, College Station, Texas, USA).
An inter-observer reproducibility study was conducted by applying the physical activity questionnaire two times in a sample of 38 consecutive incident breast cancer cases who were diagnosed between April and July 2006. The first questionnaire was applied during the study, and the second was applied 4 weeks later by the same nurses, all women answered the second questionnaire. The nurses contacted women at the General Hospital of Mexico City (SS) oncology outpatient clinic. When patients were not found in the hospital, they were contacted by phone to set up an appointment to complete the second questionnaire. The appointment for the second interview was made according to the patient’s needs and/or schedule. Those who were not able to make their appointment were visited at home.
Spearman correlation coefficients were calculated between the first and second measurement for each type of physical activity (h/week) . Agreement was assessed following the ratings suggested by Landis and Koch for agreement level: 0–0.2 poor, 0.2–0.4 fair, 0.4–0.6 moderate, 0.6–0.8 substantial and 0.8–1.0 almost perfect .
Characteristics of the study population are presented in Table 1. Compared to controls, cases were more likely to have a family history of breast cancer, to have used hormonal therapy, to have a lower number of pregnancies, to be older at the time of their first pregnancy and to have breastfed less. In terms of SES, most of the cases, both preand postmenopausal, belong to the highest tertile (41.7 and 44.4%, respectively). The highest prevalence of history of diabetes was observed in the postmenopausal cases when compared to controls (25.1 vs. 18.7%, respectively, p value = 0.002). Likewise, both pre- and postmenopausal cases showed greater alcohol consumption on average than controls. Regarding calorie intake, there was a greater consumption in both pre- and postmenopausal cases than in controls (p value \ 0.001). BMI and WHR medians were higher in controls than in cases in both pre- and postmenopausal women.
Table 2 shows the median h/week of physical activity classified as light-, moderate- and vigorous-intensity as well as MET-h/week. Overall, total MET-h/week was significantly lower in cases than in controls (median = 261 METh/week and 269.3 h/week, respectively). In postmenopausal women, total MET-h/week was significantly lower in cases than in controls (p \ 0.001), while no difference was found among premenopausal women (p = 0.39). Regarding moderate-intensity physical activity, cases reported less hours per week than controls (p \ 0.001). Occupational moderate-intensity physical activity was higher in controls Characteristics Premenopausal women p value Postmenopausal women p value Total a Premenopausal women were those who reported less than 12 months since their last period and those with surgical menopause at 48 years or younger. Postmenopausal women were those with natural menopause (C12 months since their last period) and those with surgical menopause who reported bilateral oophorectomy or those who did not know the type of surgery but who were over 48 years, given that the mean age at menopause in Mexican women is 48 years b Percentages do not reach 100% due to missing values than in cases both in pre- and postmenopausal women; however, it was statistically significant only in postmenopausal women (p \ 0.001) (Table 2).
The effect of moderate-intensity physical activity (h/ week) on the risk of breast cancer was modified by menopausal status (p = 0.009). The magnitude of the risk reduction was smaller in pre- (OR = 0.96; 95% CI 0.92– 0.99; p for trend = 0.02) than in postmenopausal women (OR = 0.90; 95% CI 0.86–0.93; p for trend = \0.001) for every 3 h per week of moderate-intensity physical activity (Table 3). Dose–response for h/week (i.e., tertiles) was observed for post- (OR = 0.76, 95% CI 0.54–1.10; OR = 0.28 95% CI 0.17–0.45) (Partial F-test for linear trend or heterogeneity: Chi2 = 24.7, p \ 0.001) but not for premenopausal women (OR = 1.46, 95% CI 0.99–2.14; OR = 0.61 95% CI 0.40–0.94) (Partial F-test for linear trend or heterogeneity Chi2 = 3.5, p = 0.06). The same figure was observed for Met-h/week (Chi2 = 26.9, p \ 0.001; Chi2 = 5.05, p = 0.02 for post- and premenopausal women, respectively), data not shown. The effect of moderate-intensity physical activity (h/week) on the risk of breast cancer was not modified by BMI neither in pre(p = 0.85) nor in postmenopausal women (p = 0.75).
Similar to other studies, we found a 4–11% breast cancer risk reduction per 3 h a week of moderate-intensity physical activity in pre- and postmenopausal women, respectively . These results are consistent with previous case–control and cohort studies as well as with a systematic review . Most recent epidemiological studies have shown that the magnitude of breast cancer risk reduction was greater in post- than in premenopausal women .
In our study, a differential effect of moderate-intensity physical activity on the risk of breast cancer by menopausal status was found (p value for interaction 0.009; premenopausal women OR = 0.96; 95% CI 0.92–0.99; postmenopausal women: OR = 0.90; 95% CI 0.86–0.93). Consistently, most studies that have assessed the relationship between physical activity and breast cancer risk have found a stronger effect in postmenopausal women . An interaction was found also by John et al., however, the magnitude of the effect was smaller in post- (OR = 0.70; 95% CI 0.59–0.94) than in premenopausal women (OR = 0.67; 95% CI 0.46–0.96) . Differences in magnitude among studies can be explained by differences in the measurement of physical activity .
Recently, Friedenreich and Cust did a review of all published literature up to September 2007, analyzing 43 studies with pre- and/or postmenopausal women (with 31 studies that included premenopausal women). Five showed statistically significant risk reductions (risk decreased 40%). However, just one of these studies evaluated moderate-intensity physical activities and none were population based. On the basis of current evidence, our results suggest that Mexican women can significantly reduce the risk of breast cancer by engaging in moderateintensity physical activity. ) ) .2 .4 3 24 ) 0 3 2 .8 – – 2 ) .33 .61 11– .64 ) )20 ) 4 7 4 –8 .1 1 4 ) tlrnoo .(9632 .(2041 ..(649 c .(820 (0–14 (278– (22–2 c (0–18 ()0–3 C 2 2 5 – 2 0 9 1 – 6 0 a OR adjusted by 5-year age group, membership to the health institution and place of residence, as well as for socioeconomic status, history of diabetes mellitus, history of breast cancer in first-degree relatives, age at menarche, parity, use of oral contraceptives, BMI, WHI, height, age at the last full term pregnancy and total consumption of calories. Results are shown for every three weekly hours of moderate-intensity physical activity b Interaction between menopausal status and moderate physical activity
Some studies have shown that regular physical activity helps to control and reduce weight and also may decrease the risk of some types of cancer, including breast cancer . It has been suggested that both moderate- and vigorous-intensity physical activity significantly affect body weight . The World Cancer Research Foundation and the American Institute for Cancer Research (WCRF/AICR) have estimated that between one-fourth and one-third of all cancers may be attributable to the combined effects of elevated body weight and inadequate physical activity .Consistently, in our study, the median of moderateintensity physical activity was lower for cases (6 h/week; interquartile range 2–13.5) than for controls (12 h/week; interquartile range 2–24; p = 0.001). Overall, the median of weekly hours of vigorous-intensity physical activity was 0 (interquartile range 0–1). In contrast, a study carried out in British women found that at least 15% of postmenopausal women exercised for more than 4 h per week .
Forty-nine percent of controls who participated in our study were in agreement with the current recommendations of physical activity for health maintenance . According to the Surgeon General’s report, the minimal level of moderate-intensity physical activity that will improve health is 150 min/week . Data from Latin American countries including Chile, Peru, Argentina, Brazil and the multi-country PAHO study showed a high prevalence of adult physical inactivity (50–91%) . In 2008, the Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans considered acceptable the CDC/ACSM recommendation ‘‘Every US adult should accumulate 30 min or more of moderateintensity physical activity on most, preferably all days of the week’’ . However, new Guidelines allow a person to accumulate 150 min a week in various ways .
Reproducibility results are shown in Table 4. This study was performed only in cases; however, our questionnaire was based on a physical activity questionnaire previously validated in the general population . Spearman correlation coefficients between the first and second questionnaires showed moderate significant agreement. For light-intensity physical activity (h/week), the Spearman correlation coefficient was 0.69 (p \ 0.001), for sleep (h/ week), it was 0.67 (p \ 0.001), for moderate-intensity physical activity (h/week) was 0.40 (p = 0.01) and for vigorous-intensity physical activity (h/week) was 0.31 (p = 0.05). These correlations are similar to those published by Norman et al. and Wolf et al. , but in the study by Norman et al. , the time lapse between the application of the first and second questionnaire was 6 months (6 months apart), and in the study by Wolf et al., the time lapse was 2 years. In our study, the time lapse between the two recalls was 4 weeks. Other studies have evaluated longer periods (up to one or 2 years) showing higher correlations .
To our knowledge, this is the first case–control study that assesses the relationship between moderate-intensity physical activity and breast cancer risk in Mexican women. Although physical activity, overweight and obesity are strongly correlated, they conferred an independent effect on the risk of breast cancer, particularly in postmenopausal women. In this group of women, the finding that increased 56.5 (45–80.5) 105 (0.5–122) 3 (0–13) 1 (0–6.5) 0.69 0.67 0.40 0.31 moderate-intensity physical activity reduces the risk of breast cancer is promising, since it indicates that it may not be necessary for women to engage in strenuous activity to achieve the protective effects of exercise. In our study, participating in moderate-intensity physical activity decreased the risk of breast cancer. This effect was observed in women both before and after menopause. Strategies need to be identified that will engage women in physical activity programs.
Acknowledgments We would like to recognize CONACyT for the financial support provided for this work and all physicians responsible for the project in the different participating hospitals: Dr. Germa´n Castelazo (IMSS, Ciudad de Me´xico, DF), Dr. Sinhue´ Barroso Bravo (IMSS, Ciudad de Me´xico, DF), Dr. Fernando Mainero Ratchelous (IMSS, Ciudad de Me´xico, DF), Dr. Joaqu´ın Zarco Me´ndez (ISSSTE, Ciudad de Me´xico, DF), Dr. Edelmiro Pe´rez Rodr´ıguez (Hospital Universitario, Monterrey, Nuevo Leo´n), Dr. Jesu´s Pablo Esparza Cano (IMSS, Monterrey, Nuevo Leo´n), Dr. Heriberto Fabela (IMSS, Monterrey, Nuevo Leo´n), Dr. Fausto Herna´ndez Morales (ISSSTE, Veracruz, Veracruz), Dr. Pedro Coronel Brizio (CECAN SS, Xalapa, Veracruz) and Dr. Vicente A. Saldan˜a Quiroz (IMSS, Veracruz, Veracruz).
