Endocrinological changes occurring during pregnancy may influence the subsequent cancer risk of the mother. Further, the endocrinological milieu may differ according to different birth characteristics. In the present study possible relations between multiple births, sex of children and breast-cancer risk were examined in a population-based. prospective study of 802,269 parous Norwegianwomen aged 20-56 years. A total of 4,782 women were diagnosed with breast cancer duringfollowup. Of these, 97 had ever experienced a multiple birth. We found a slightly lower risk of breast cancer among women ever having had a multiple birth than among women with singletons only (IRR = 0.89, 95% CI = 0.73-1.09). The reduction in risk was mainly observed among women with a multiple last birth. Further, the reduction in risk seemed to diminish with increasing parity, and among women with 4 or more full-term pregnancies, ever having had a multiple birth was associated with an elevated risk (IRR = I.48, 95% CI = 0.97-2.25). The sex of the first or last child did not affect the subsequent breast-cancer risk. Further, we found no associationswith the sex distribution among all children or in multiple births, despite a tendency towarda reduced risk amongwomenwith several daughtersonly. Q 109j Wilq-LLss,Inc During pregnancy a woman is strongly exposed to different cndogcnous hormones (Pritchard eta/., 1985) and pregnancies seem to influence hormone secretion permanently (Bruning et al.. 1987; Musey et a/., 1987; Wang et al., 1988). Further, the hormone levels may differ according to plurality (Batra e t a / . , 1978; Hsieh et al.. 1992) and the male fetus has an endocrine activity different from that of the female (Juret ei a/., 1978). Thus, if the observed associalion between breast-cancer incidence and reproductive factors can be explained by a hormonal influence, endocrinological differences reflecting different birth characteristics may also lead to variations in the suhscquent cancer risk for the mother.
The sex of the first child has been found to be a prognostic factor for breast cancer, although divergent results have been reported . There are, however, few reports on possible associations with the incidence of breast cancer.
In the present study, potential relations between breastcancer incidence, multiple births and sex of the children are examined. The results are drawn from a large, populationbased study with follow-up information on reproductive history and cancer diagnoses during the age interval 20-56 years.
SUBJECTS .AND METHODS
The present study includes all parous Norwegian women born in the period 1935-1071. who had been residents of Norway for some period after 1960. The closing date of the study was December 31, 1991. A total of 802,269 women were included in the follow-up, contributing a total of 9,345,257 person-years in the age interval 20-56 years. Mean follow-up time per woman was 11.6 years (range 0.5 month to 36.9 years).
T h e reproductive history of each woman was obtained from the Central Population Register a t the Central Bureau of Statistics. The file with information on demographic and reproductive characteristics has been described previously (Albrektsen et a / . , 1994) and the present updated version includes reproductive history up to the end of 1991. A total of 16,287 (2%) women had ever experienced a multiple birth (16,071 with twins, 206 with triplets, 8 with quadruplets, and 2 with quintuplets). A total of 169 women had experienced a multiple birth more than once.
The official birth registration number for each woman was used to link information on cancer cases, obtained from the Cancer Registry of Norway, and emigrations and deaths from the Central Bureau of Statistics, to our file containing reproductive history. Since 1953 all cancer diagnoses have by law been reported to the National Cancer Registry. The present study is based on information about all new breast-cancer cases (ICD 7th Revision, code 170) diagnosed in the period 1955-1991 for the birth-cohorts 1935-1971.
Statistical analyses
Possible relations between multiple births, sex of the children and breast-cancer incidence were investigated in a log-linear Poisson regression model of person-years at risk (Breslow and Day, 1987) with age as the time-scale. A woman was considered to be at risk of developing breast cancer from the time of the last recorded birth until the date of emigration, death, cancer diagnosis or closing date of the study. There were few breast-cancer cases among women below the age of 20 years. Further, no women were older than 56 years at the closing date of the study. Therefore, all analyses were restricted to the age interval 20-56 years. Stratification was made on attained age in I-year intervals, birth-cohort in 5-year intervals and parity in 5 categories, the last category representing 5 or more full-term pregnancies. Maximum likelihood estimates of incidence rate ratios with 95% confidence intervals were calculated by means of the EPICURE program package (Preston et al., 1993).
RESULTS
A total of 4,782 women were diagnosed with breast cancer during follow-up. The diagnosis was supported by histological examination and/or by autopsy for 4,737 cancers (99.1%). A total of 97 women with a breast-cancer diagnosis had ever had
TABLE I - INCIDEhCE RATE RATIOS (IRR WITH 9.5% CI) O F BREAST CANCER BY DIFFERENT CHARACTERISTICS O F A MULTIPLE BIRTH' ~~
I R R (9sa cI) 'Based on Poisson regression analysis of person-years at risk, results adjusted for attained age, birth-cohort and number of full-term pregnancies.-'Reference group.-'Most recent multiple birth if more than one. a multiple birth. None had experienced such a birth more than once and the multiple births among these women included only twin-births.
Women who had ever experienced a multiple birth had a slightly lower risk than women with only singleton births (Table I). The reduction in risk was mainly observed among women with a multiple last birth and the risk was not reduced in women with a multiple birth late in their reproductive lives (Table I). The estimated effect of a multiple birth did not show any consistent pattern of variation across strata of attained age, but it differed somewhat across strata of number of full-term pregnancies (Table 11). The reduction in risk diminished with increasing parity ( p = 0.02; 2-sided test for trend) and, among women with 4 or more full-term pregnancies, having had a multiple birth was associated with an elevated risk.
The estimated effect of ever having had a multiple birth was not influenced by additional adjustment for age at first or last births and the results were in general consistently observed across strata of these variables. In analyses among multiparous women, excluding those with a multiple first birth, the risk estimates according to age at the multiple birth were slightly closer to unity when adjustment was made for age at first birth. Compared to women with no multiple births, the adjusted incidence rate ratios for women with a multiple birth at age I24, 25-29, and 2 30 years were 0.84 (95% CI = 0.48-1.48), 1.04 (95% CI = 0.73-1.48) and 0.97 (95% CI = 0.66-1.41), respectively.
Among women with the same number of full-term pregnancies, those who have ever experienced a multiple birth have more children than those with singletons only. In analyses adjusted for the total number of children rather than the total number of full-term pregnancies, the I R R for women ever having had a multiple birth compared to women with singletons only was almost equal to unity ( I R R = 1.03, 95% CI = 0.84-1.27).
Sex of first or last child was in general of no importance for the risk of developing breast cancer (Table 111). Further, no definite association was seen between breast-cancer risk and the sex distribution among all children (Table III), although there was a tendency toward a relationship among women with
-attained age (yrs) - < 39
Never
Ever -numberof full-term pregnancies 1 4 0 4 4
Never
Ever 2 45
Never
Ever 2 3
Ever 2 4
Never E~ve.r~ 'Based on Poisson regression analysis of person-years at risk, results adjusted for attained age, birth-cohort and number of full-term pregnancies.-?Reference group within stratum.
'Based on Poisson regression analysis of person-years at risk, results adjusted for attained age, birth-cohort and number of full-term pregnancies.-'Reference group. 4 or more full-term pregnancies, In this group, those with girls only seemed to experience a lower risk than women with children of both sexes (IRR = 0.74, 95% CI = 0.47-1.14), whereas those with boys only had no such reduction in risk ( I R R = 1.05. 95% CI = 0.75-1.48). We did not observe any significant variation in breast-cancer risk according to sex distribution in multiple births, although mothers with a mulBREAST-CANCER RISK AND BIRTH CHARACTERISTICS tiplc birth of girls only had a reduced risk on the border of statistical significance (Table I). Additional adjustment for age at first or last births did not notably influence the risk estimates.
DISCUSSION
The results of this prospective study were based on information from the whole population obtained from nationwide registers, and are thus not influenced by selection or recall bias.
The present study included women aged 20-56 years. The slightly reduced risk of breast cancer observed among women with multiple births compared to women with singletons only is consistent with results report’zd by Jacobson et al. (1989). Othcr studies which included women above the age of 56 years have failed to demonstrate an association be tween breast-cancer incidence and multiple births, and even an elevated risk has been reported (Hsieh et a / . , 1993). Yo protective effect was found even when the analyses were restricted to women below the age of 55 years (Nasca er af.,19! > 2;Hsieh et a/., 1994). However, low numbers of cancer cases among women below the age of 55 ycars in these studies resulted in imprecise estimates and the risk estimates were not substantially different from those observed in the present study. Our results give some support to the obscrvation of a more pronounced protective effect of a multiple last birth (Jacobson et al., 1989; Nasca et al., 1992).
We have observed (data not shown) a short-term increase in risk of breast cancer after a full-term pregnancy, followed by a long-lasting decrease in risk. In the present study with 63 cancer diagnoses among women with a multiple last birth, the relationships between time since last birth and breast-cancer risk were quite similar after a multiple birth and a single birth. Compared to women with no multiple births, Hsieh et a / . (1993) observed an elevated risk in the first 15-year period after a multiple birth and thereafter a decrease in risk. Other studies (Jacobson et al., 1980; Nasca et a / . , 1992) have not found any association between breast-cancer risk and time since last multiple birth.
Biological explanations have been proposed for an elevated as well as a decreased risk of breast cancer after a multiple birth compared to a single birth. A possible explanation for a decreased risk relates to the doubling of the level of serum alpha-fetoproteins in twin pregnancies, substances which have been shown to have an anti-es.trogeniceffect in animal models (Jacobson et al., 1989). Also, a protective effect might be expected due t o higher sex-hormone-binding globulin concentrations in serum among women with multiple births (Murphy et al., 1990). In contrast, an in’xeasedrisk of breast cancer due to elevated levels of gonadotropins among mothers of dizygotic twins has been hypothesized . Other explanations of a potentially elevated risk relate to an increased immunosuppressive activity (Campbell er al., 1977; Janerich, 1979) and increased levels of estrogens during pregnancies resulting in a multiple birth, especially multizygotic multiple births (Hsieh et al., 1992, 1993).
The dizygotic twinning rate increases with increasing maternal age and with increasing parity (Bulmer, 1970). Thus, a possibly elevated risk of breast cancer among women with a multiple birth late in the reproductive life and among women with many children may be related to the higher frequency of multizygotic multiple births and thereby higher levels of estrogens during pregnancies resulting in such births (Murphy, 1990; Hsieh et al., 1992). However, in agreement with the results of Jacobson et al. (1989). we found n o difference in risk of breast cancer associated with gender in the case of multiple births. This result does not support the hypothesis of a difference in effect between homozygotic and heterozygotic multiple births as suggested by Hsieh et al. (1993).
A possible protective effect of a multiple birth may be related to the general protective effect of increasing parity. For instance, if a twin birth accounts for the effect of about 1.5 or perhaps 2 single births, we would then expect a reduced risk among women with such a birth. With adjustment for total number of children rather than total number of full-term pregnancies, we found no difference in risk between women who had ever experienced a multiple birth and women with singletons only. Further, the more pronounced protective effect of having a multiple birth relatively early in the reproductive life (Table I) may be related to the general protective effect of low age at birth.
There are few studies which have examined the relation between breast-cancer incidence and gender of the offspring. In agreement with 2 previous reports on this issue (Janerich et al., 1980; Nasca et al., 1992). we did not find any relation between breast cancer risk and sex of the children.
The lack of association between breast-cancer incidence and gender of offspring observed in this large, population-based prospective study suggests that such an association, if it exists, must b e quite weak. Our results are in agreement with the hypothesis that a multiple last birth is related to a decreased risk, but the overall evidence suggesting that the effect of a pregnancy resulting in a multiple birth is different from the general protective effect of a single birth is still weak.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to Dr. S. Tretli at the Cancer Registry of Norway for his support during the initial phase of this project and to Dr. 0.Kravdal a t the Central Bureau of Statistics, who was responsible for the generation of the data file containing the information on reproductive factors. This research was made possible by financial support from the Norwegian Cancer Society. ALBREKTSEGN., HEUCHI,., TRErLI, S. and KVALE.G.. Breast cancer incidence before age 55 in relation to parity and age at first and last births: a prospective study of one million Norwegian women. Epiderniolop, 5,h04-611 (1994).
BATKAS,.. SIGHERGN,.O. and ERG. A., Human placental lactogen, estradiol-17P. and progesterone levels in the third trimester and their respective values for detecting twin pregnancy. Amer. J, Obsrrt. Qnecol.. 131,69-73 (1978).
BRESLOWN. .E. and DAYN,.E., Statistical methods in cancer research. Voi. 2 . The design and analysis of cohort studies, pp. 119-1715, IARC Scientific Publication 82, JARC, L,yon (1987).
BRUNlNG. P.F., BONFRERJ. M.G. and VERSTRAETENA,.A., Prolactin levels after pregnancy. New EngL J. Med., 317,384-385 (1987). BULMERM,.G., The biology of rwintzing in mnn, pp. 74- 83, Oxford University Press, London (1970).
CAMPBELDL.,M.. MACGILLIVRAIY.a.nd THOMPSOBN., ,Twin zygosity and pre-eclampsia. Lancet. 2,97 (1977).
ELWOODJ,.M. and COLDMANA,.J., Breast cancer prognosis and the sex of the patient’s children. Cancer, 47,985-988 (1981).
HSIEH.C.-C., GOLDMANM, ., PAVIAM,., EKBOMA. ,, PETRIDOUE. ., ADAMIH, . - 0 . and TRICHOPOULODS.., Breast cancer risk in mothers of multiple births. Int. J. Cancer, 54, 81-84 (1993).
HSIEHC,.-C., GOLDMANM, ., PAVIAM,., TRICHOPOULODS., PETRIDOU, E., EKBOMA,. and ADAMI,H.-O., Re: “The relation between multiple births and maternal risk of breast cancer” and “Multiple
