Clavel F (Unit6 de Recherches en Epidemiologie des Cancers, Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale, Institut Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France), Andrieu N, Gairard B, Bremond A, Piana L, Lansac J, Breart G, Rumeau-Rouquette C, Flamant R and Renaud R. Oral contraceptives and breast cancer: A French case-control study. IntemationalJournal of Epidemiology 1991; 20: 32-38. The relationship between the risk of breast cancer and oral contraceptive use was investigated in a case-control study conducted in France between 1983 and 1987 in five public hospitals. Some 464 cases aged 25 to 56 years and 542 matched controls were interviewed about their history of the use of oral contraceptives (OC). Results are given for the entire population and for the subgroup of 358 and 379 premenopausal cases and controls. The multivariate relative risk estimate, for ever use, was 1.5 (p < 0.01) in the whole group as well as in the premenopausal subgroup (p < 0.02). However, there was no evidence that the effect varied appreciably according to duration of use, age at first use, use before first full-term pregnancy (FFTP) and time since first or last use. The risk was not altered for any particular brand of OC. We conclude that, because of the widespread attention given to the relationship between OC use and breast cancer, information bias might be responsible for part of the excess in risk observed among OC ever users.
Numerous women worldwide use oral contraceptives and it is of the greatest importance to be fully aware of any harmful side effects. Circulatory diseases and malignant neoplasms have been extensively studied in relation to the use of oral contraceptives (OC). Reviews of the numerous case-control studies devoted to the possible association between the use of OC and breast cancer'"3 have so far proved inconclusive. In particular, the studies of women who have used the pill in their late teens and early twenties are controversial. We report here the results of a recent case-control study conducted in France in an attempt to clarify this situation.
Eligible cases and controls had to be white women of French nationality, who were not pregnant or breastfeeding and with no previous malignancies. Cases had to be 20-55 years old, with any histologically-defined breast cancer (except in situ carcinoma), confirmed at most seven months before inclusion in the study. The date of diagnosis was the date of the first positive biopsy. For every case, one or two controls were selected from patients hospitalized either for a malignant tumour diagnosed at most seven months before inclusion or for a non-malignant condition diagnosed at most 12 months before. The criteria for matching controls to cases were age at interview (± five years), year of birth (± five years), date of interview (± 14 months), interviewer and hospital.
Over 99% of subjects agreed to be interviewed. Cases and controls were interviewed by trained interviewers who were either gynaecologists or gynaecology stu•Standard deviation Duration of use (months) tadjusted for hospital, age (in single years), familial history of breast cancer (yes/no), personal history of benign breast disease (yes/no), married (yes/no), educational level (primary, secondary, university), number of chiklbirths ( 0 , 1 - 3 , 4 +), number of years without childbirth ( « 24/ > 25), age at menarche ( < 14/»14), Quetelet index ( < 20,20-25,25-29 » 3 0 ) , smoking habits (non-smokers, ex-smokers, current smokers < 15 cigarettes/ day, » 1 6 cigarettes/day), alcohol consumption ( 0 , 1 , 2 , » 3 glasses/day) and for the whole group, on menopausal status (natural menopause < 45 or *45, versus premenopausal or artificial menopause) tOR: Odds Ratio France from 1967-1987. The interviewers were aware during which years these brands were available.
Some 464 cases and 542 controls were identified. Of the cases, 78% had galactophoric adenocarcinomas, and of the remaining, 11% had lobular carcinomas. Over half of the 107 controls hospitalized for cancer (51%) had leukaemia. Patients with reproductive, colon or salivary gland carcinomas were not accepted as controls. Of the 435 controls with non-malignant conditions, 87% were in hospital for a blood test, stomatological or orthopaedic disorders, or ear, nose or throat problems.
The data were validated using the PIGAS system/
Premenopausal women dents. For practical reasons, interviewers could not be blinded to the case-control status of each interviewee.
AU cases and 98% of the controls were interviewed in person. Two per cent of the controls were interviewed by telephone. Interviews took about 40 minutes and information was recorded using a structured questionnaire and covered the following characteristics: basic demographic details, current and past medical history, menstrual and reproductive experience, lifestyle factors (e.g. tobacco and alcohol consumption), familial medical history and contraceptive history. The latter included type of contraception, start and duration of use, and for oral contraception, the brand used (brands were coded into broad categories). To help those interviewed to recall their contraceptive history, a calendar was used as well as the packages of pills marketed in t, t See Table 2 for footnotes TABLE 4 Riskt of breast cancer by duration of oral contraceptiw use before first full-term pregnancy (FFTP); unconditional logistic regression analysis (porous women only) Incomplete questionnaires were returned and either the woman concerned was re-interviewed, or the information was extracted from her medical record. The results are given for the entire population, and for the subgroup of premenopausal women. All the odds ratios (OR) were derived from an unconditional multivariate logistic regression analysis3 using the computer package GLIM6 because, in order to analyse the data for premenopausal women only, the matching had to be broken. We verified that, for the whole population, the OR obtained from the conditional and unconditional models were similar.
The main characteristics of cases and controls (Table 1) show that the mean age at diagnosis was 45 years (SD = 7) for cases and 44 (SD = 8) for controls (NS). As expected, a familial history of breast cancer, a history of benign breast disease, low parity, late age at first term birth and early age at menarche were more common among cases than controls, both in the whole group and the premenopausal subgroup. In the whole group, most of the cases were premenopausal, but post-menopausal cases had had a later menopause than controls. Cases were also more often nonsmokers, consumed alcohol more often and had a higher educational level.
The results of the logistic analysis of total OC use in the entire population and the premenopausal subgroup were adjusted for a variety of possible confounding factors. The adjusted OR associated with ever-use of OC was 1.5 (95% Confidence Interval (CI):1.1-2.1) for the whole group and 1.5 (95% CI:1.1-2.1) for the subgroup. No increase in the breast cancer risk with the duration of OC use was apparent. The highest risk was observed among short-term users (12-23 months, Table 2). Calculation of theriskaccording to age at first OC use also gave point estimates around 1.5 (Table 3).
Among parous women, the risk of breast cancer was calculated according to the duration of OC use before NB. The percentage of OC users may exceed 100% since a woman may have taken several brands of pill t, t See Table 2 for footnotes °EE - ethinyl-estradiol Time since first use non-users «10 years 11-15 years 16-20 years «S21 years the first full-term pregnancy (FFTP). Among the small number of women included in our study who had used the pill before FFTP (less than 10% of parous women), no increase in the risk for long-term users could be observed. Risks rose significantly for intermediate periods of use (between 24 and 59 months), but no consistent pattern of risk was apparent (Table 4). Various formulations of OC were also analysed, but here again, no important differences emerged (Table 5). In addition, OC use was examined according to the time since first use (Table 6) and since last use (Table 7).
Although the risk reached significance in some categories, our results failed to identify any groups at particularly altered risk related to latency or time since last use.
In our study, the overall risk associated with OC use was increased. However, the magnitude of this association differed only slightly with characteristics considered as potentially able to modify the risk, such as age at first use, duration of use, duration of use before FFTP, OC composition, time elapsed since last use and time since first use. t, t See Table 2 for footnotes
Difficulties arise in studying the association between OC use and breast cancer because of the combined effect of a low incidence rate of breast cancer among young women (who are more concerned about contraception) and low OC use before the 1970s. Half of the women participating in the present study had ever taken the pill. The proportion of OC ever-users was lower than that reported by some authors7"11 but nearer to that reported by others.12"15 In other studies16"21 the proportion of OC ever-users was much smaller, probably because these studies were undertaken when OC consumption was still rare, or because the participants were older.
In our study, OC consumption early in life did not affect breast cancer risk, but the small proportion of subjects who used oral contraception at young ages and before FFTP may be responsible for an eventual lack of power. Other findings are conflicting: some casecontrol studies have indicated an increase in the risk for women aged up to 35 or 40 years,71*'10"12 but other authors have observed no such increase.91s"18Jlt22 Concerning the effect of OC use before FFTP, some casecontrol studies have shown an increased risk among OC users before FFTP,8-10 12 16 substantiated by a " ' recent reanalysis of the large CASH study.23-24 Others, however, reported reassuring findings.915
In our study, no consistent pattern in breast cancer risk was observed according to duration of OC use. However, increasing risk with increased duration of OC use has been seen in some studies7'810"'214 and not in others.'-17-"-
21 22
The existence of a latent period between OC use and the development of breast cancer also requires consideration.25 In six of the eleven case-control studies in which an attempt was made to assess theriskof breast cancer long after the initial exposure to OC914 16 21 a " risk of around 0.8 was found to be associated with OC long after initial use. Conversely, other results"121718'20 supported the possibility of an increased risk (OR around 1.5-2.5) after at least ten years of latency. Although no consistent evidence for this increase is yet available from retrospective studies, a recent analysis of an on-going cohort study26 provided further indications of the existence of a latent period between exposure to OC and the clinical emergence of breast cancer.
As regards the distribution of the risk among cases and controls according to the formulation of OC consumed, we found no significant differences between the various brands of pills. Nevertheless, it is hard to imagine that any detrimental effect of OCs exists regardless of their composition. Although a considerable body of literature has been devoted to discussing the accuracy of Pike's classification of 'progestagen potency' and its effect on breast tissue, the issue is still controversial. Recent investigations of the effects of OC composition on large series of users produced no evidence that women who had used combined OCs only experienced risks according to the type of oestrogen or progestin the pills contained.14
In our study the premenopausal subgroup and the entire population had risks of similar magnitude which indicates that OCs do not exert a specific effect in inducing early breast cancer. On the contrary, ORs were sometimes lower in the subgroup.
Recall bias is probable because the name and pattern of use of the OC is less readily forgotten by women with breast cancer who have better reason to think hard about their medical history than controls. This problem may be partially solved by prospective studies, by consulting pharmacy records13 or general practitioner's notes.7 But even then, one can never assume perfect compliance for any drug. In our study, the interviewers were gynaecologists capable of helping women to remember what particular brand of OC they had used. Brand names were grouped into broad categories, and no case or control users were classified in the category reported as unknown. Nevertheless, it is still possible that episodes of contraception could have been omitted.
To avoid selection bias in the present investigation we selected hospitalized patients with a range of diseases not related to OC use. Surveillance bias can also be ruled out. Among the cases, the percentage of women who had had a mammography was similar among OC users and non-users (50%). Breast selfexamination was practised slightly more often by OC users (70%) than non-users (63%), but the difference was not significant. The stage of breast cancer was comparable for users and non-users; the proportion node-negative was 68% for users and 61% for nonusers (NS), and the proportion of tumours under 2 cm in diameter was 29% for users and 28% for non-users (NS). The breast lump was discovered by a doctor in 27% of OC users and 32% of non-users (NS).
Pike and Bernstein24 suggested that both birth cohort and age needed to be taken into account, since OC use changes not only with the woman's age but also with her year of birth. To prevent such bias, our controls were randomly matched with cases within the limits of the matching criteria defined in Methods. Both age at interview and year of birth of cases and of their matched controls were thus controlled and so cannot have affected OC use.
Information bias due to the many reports by the media on the possible adverse effects of OC must be considered. In the absence of any particular pattern of risk in our results, we suggest that this type of bias might be responsible for part of the overall excess of OC users among cases as compared to controls in our study.
This work was supported by a grant from the Institut National de la Sant6 et de la Recherche M6dicale (PRC no 132016), attributed to Professor Renaud. The authors are grateful to the following gynaecologistinterviewers who collected the data: P Collet, D Freslier and C Prot.
