Summary. The relationship between psychosomatic characteristics and the risk of breast cancer was studied in women aged from 35 to 65 years, presenting with a clinically palpable breast tumor. To permit a double-blind design, the psychosomatic evaluation obtained by a long open-ended interview was completed before any diagnostic procedure. On the basis of this evaluation, the psychosomatician concluded that the patient was at high or low risk of serious disease. Several other psychological parameters were also recorded, and the diagnosis was then established by cytology or histology. Nineteen of the 77 patients finally included in the study had histologically verified breast cancer. The relative risk (RR) of breast cancer associated with psychosomatic factors was estimated by multivariate unconditional logistic regression, taking into account age at interview, family history of breast cancer, parity and age at first delivery. A significant relationship (p = 0.02) was found between psychosomatic prognosis and the relative risk of breast cancer. Both the low and high risk groups identified by the psychosomaticians had a similar mean age (46.1 versus 47.6 years). Fundamental mental structure played a predominant role in the risk of breast cancer, since no case was observed among the 18 patients with well organized neurosis, and all the 19 malignant tumors were observed among patients with poorly organized neurosis or psychosis (RR = 7.8, p = 0.009). In addition, excessive self-esteem (RR = 10.0, p = 0.02), hysterical disposition (RR = 7.5, p = 0.02), and unresolved recent grief (RR = 8.2, p = 0.05), were found to be significantly related to the risk of breast cancer. These results suggest that this risk may be affected by psychosomatic factors.
Many anecdotal case reports of stress-induced illness, as well as numerous experimental and clinical studies, have focused attention on the possibility that the development of cancer might be connected with psychosomatic factors such as personality and/or unresolved emotional stress. These studies have frequently given contradictory results,1 probably because most of them only involved small groups of subjects, since the recruitment of patients for such studies is difficult. Furthermore, the type and severity of the disease were often poorly defined, and the statistical analyses, somewhat incomplete. In addition, the diversity of the psychological methods used to define personality characteristics complicates assessment of published results.27
The psychosomatic theory developed by P. Marty8 is based on the identification by psychoanalytical concepts of a fundamental structure of the personality which characterizes each individual from the earliest years of life.
This structure may be defined as the permanent unchangeable state of mental defenses against psychological trauma. The mentality of each individual is determined by the efficacy and continuity of the preconscious functioning which constitutes the central machinery of mental organization. According to Marty's theory, the capacity to allay serious psychological trauma is conditioned by: a) the number and thickness of the mental layers making up the representative systems acquired by the individual, especially during the early development; b) the fluidity of the connections between these systems; and c) the permanence of associative functioning.
Note that Marty's classification does not acknowledge the existence of a so-called "normal" mental structure, but only of a psychotic or neurotic structure,
Psychosis is a well-accepted designation for constitutive or acquired mental disorders in which the personality is very seriously disorganized. Neurosis is more difficult to define. It is considered as a functional disorder of the nervous system without apparent organic or structural injury, or change. It results only in partial disorganization of the personality. According to Marty's classification, neurosis is the general term used to characterize all types of nonpsychotic mental organization. There are two main types: a) well-organized neurosis, which applies to patients with permanently well-organized mental functioning and allows satisfactory adaptation to all types of psychological trauma; and b) poorly organized neurosis, in which the patient does not have the mental structure to cope with severe psychological stress such as the loss of someone or something important in one's life.
The fundamental structure of each individual can only be identified by evaluating the dynamic evolution of his or her personality. The interviewer must therefore appreciate the usual type of mental functioning of the subject by studying his or her case history and psychosomatic symptoms such as phobia and free floating anxiety. Psychosomaticians also aim at defining what they call the major usual characteristics that concern the present state of mental functioning, for instance, those observed during the two previous years, and the responses to serious psychological trauma.
One of the most severe traumas is unresolved grief, which may be defined as a mental disorganization that can lead, for example, to acute, subacute or latent depression, the latter being characterized by the absence of neurotic or psychotic symptoms. It can also lead to free-floating anxiety which is not related to any apparent cause and reflects poor organization of psychological defenses.
Although Marty's classification is obviously subjective and depends on the investigator's experience, we considered that it had the advantage over standard psychometric evaluations of being a method of dynamic appreciation of the personality that takes account of the patient's case history and symptomatic evolution.
The decision to use Marty's classification was strengthened by the results of a recent retrospective survey of 323 female patients treated at the French Institute of Psychosomatic Medicine (IPSO). This survey disclosed that fundamental mental structure is related to the risk of developing a serious illness.9
The present study, which was designed to assess this risk, was of the case-control type, and was limited to cancer of the breast. Breast cancer is not only the most frequent form of neoplastic disease in French women, but its genesis is widely suspected to be influenced by hormonal factors, whose regulation is known to be affected by psychological factors.10"12
In our study, all patients underwent a psychosomatic evaluation prior to any diagnostic procedure, to permit a double-blind investigation. After this evaluation, the cytologic or histologic diagnosis allowed subjects with malignant tumors to be classified as cases, and those with benign tumors, as controls. We report here the results of this study, performed between September 1984 and April 1988.
filling the conditions of the protocol outlined below.
The patients were either French or French-speaking women who had resided in France for at least 10 years and had consulted for one or several palpable breast tumors.
Initially, the protocol stipulated the inclusion of patients aged from 40 to 58 years and was designed to cover 240 subjects who, according to French epidemiological statistics, were expected to include 60 cases of breast cancer.
The study design was the following: an initial consultation with the participating physicians was immediately followed by IPSO's evaluation. Next, the nature of the tumor was diagnosed by mammography and cytologic or histologic examination. Accordingly, subjects were required to have undergone no radiographic, cytologic or histologic examinations during the 3 months preceding the study, because it was essential that they should not know whether their tumors were benign or malignant at the time of the initial consultation.
The protocol also excluded women who refused to undergo these examinations during the study, and those who refused to participate in the psychosomatic investigation by IPSO. These primary exclusions were made at the first consultation.
Secondary exclusion concerned women who had come to IPSO after they had acquired knowledge of the results of a cytologic or histologic examination or of a mammography, women who had agreed to these examinations but did not actually have them or whose results had not been communicated to the participating physician, and women who had not come for their interview with IPSO. Only IPSO and the coordinating center were entitled to make secondary exclusions.
To determine the percentage of inclusion, the names of all the patients who consulted for breast symptoms during the study period were recorded and physicians were asked to indicate either the cause of exclusion or, for eligible patients, their serial number.
However, after the first year of the study, these inclusion conditions proved to be so restrictive that it was felt necessary to widen the age range for inclusion from 40-58 years to 32-65 years.
The initial questionnaire filled in by the physician recorded all known risk factors (i.e. marital status, weight, age at first menses, date of the last menses for menopausal patients, history of benign mastopathy, family history of breast cancer, number and dates of pregnancies and any abortions, and use of oral contraception). Among the clinical parameters also recorded were the period elapsing between the first symptom and first consultation, and the characteristics of tumor(s) and axillary nodes. Lastly, both the physician and patient were asked to give their opinion as to whether the tumor(s) was benign or malignant.
This questionnaire was sent to the coordinating center prior to the psychosomatic evaluation.
The clinicians made the patient's appointment with the psychosomatician by telephoning the secretary of IPSO in charge of the study. The seven consulting psychosomaticians therefore had no direct contact with the referring physician and no information on the epidemiological or clinical characteristics of the patient at the time of consultation.
The psychosomatic evaluation was made during an interview of about one hour. Each patient was defined by 1) her fundamental mental structure (one item only), 2) her habitual mental functioning, evaluated by anamnesis (2 to 8 items) and 3) recent symptomatology and anamnesic data (1 to 6 items). The psychosomaticians then allocated each patient to a group with a high or low risk of breast cancer. The overall data concerning the patient's psychosomatic characteristics and prognosis were sent directly to the coordinating center and entered in a computer.
After this evaluation, the patients underwent mammography and either cytologic or histologic examination of their tumor. The participating physicians were only told of the results of the evaluation on request, and always after the patient had completed the diagnostic procedures mentioned above.
A two-step statistical analysis was then performed. The first step comprised a preliminary correspondence factorial analysis, in which the most discriminative variables were selected among the multiple correlations between the tumor diagnosis and the psychological variables; during the second step, these variables were analyzed by stepwise unconditional linear logistic regression, adjusted for age at diagnosis, family history of breast cancer, age at first delivery and parity. All tests were two-tailed.13
Between September 1984 and April 1988, 2.298 patients attended initial clinical consultations. Of these, 1.640 (73%) were excluded because they had already been treated for breast cancer or benign breast lesions. Of the 658 patients consulting for the first time, 356 (13%) were too young or too old for inclusion. Other causes of exclusion are shown in Table 1.
After primary exclusion, 122 patients were eligible for participation in the study. The causes of secondary exclusion were cancellation of or late arrival at the IPSO interview (30 patients), knowledge of diagnosis acquired before this interview (6 patients), mammography previous to the interview (3 patients) and non-availability of tumor diagnosis (6 patients).
Consequently, 77 patients were finally included in the study: 31 of them (40%) underwent a histologic biopsy, and the remaining 46, a cytologic examination. As a result, 18 patients were found to have histologically proven breast cancer, and 59, a benign breast disease or no disease.
During the follow-up of the latter patients, one additional case of breast cancer was diagnosed within six months. The total sample therefore included 19 breast cancer cases and 58 control patients with benign breast disease who were followed up for at least six months (mean duration of follow-up: 9 months). As expected, clinical diagnosis was strongly related to histologic diagnosis: thus, among the 55 Previously treated women (breast cancer or benign breast lesions) Excluded forage: - too young - too old Other causes of exclusion a Not evaluated for the 7 patients lost to follow-up. patients who presented with a clinically benign breast tumor, only 4 had cancer (7%) and conversely, 15 out of 22 apparently malignant tumors (68%) were histologically proven to be malignant. a RRm = RR estimated in a multivariate analysis that took account of all the factors in the table. ° RRs = RRm using, in addition, a stepwise forward procedure (entry limit of 0.40, and removal limit of 0.45). c CI = Confidence interval. ° Risk estimated only for parous women, taking all the other factors studied into account.
Comparison of the clinical and epidemiological characteristics of the 77 patients included in the study with those of the 45 excluded (Table 2) showed no significant differences between them, except that the tumors of the excluded patients were more often multifocal and smaller. Most important, excluded and included patients comprised similar proportions of breast cancer cases (18 and 25% respectively), which meant that the results of the study were less likely to be biased.
Only age at interview was significantly related to the risk of breast cancer (RR = 7.8, p = 0.007). The relationships found between this risk and most of the factors studied were the opposite to that usually reported (Table 3). Thus, celibacy, high socioeconomic status, family history of breast cancer, late age at first delivery, multiparity and the use of oral contraceptives were apparently associated with a lower rather than a higher risk of breast cancer. However, none of these factors were significantly related to this risk. The four factors which were related to the risk of breast cancer with a p-value < 0.40 (RRs), namely age at interview, family history of breast cancer, age at first delivery and parity, were considered as potential confounders in all the subsequent analyses14.
IPSO prognosis. A significant positive correlation (p = 0.02) was observed between the relative risk of breast cancer and the psychosomatic prognosis after univariate and multivariate analyses that took account of the main risk factors (Table 4).
Age at interview did not play a significant role in determining this prognosis, since the mean ages for low and high risk (46.1 vs 47.6 years) were not different. None of the other epidemiologic or clinical parameters was significantly associated with the IPSO prognosis (Table 5).
sociated with the nature of the tumor (p = 0.009, Table 6). It is worth noting that there were no cases of breast cancer among the 18 patients with well organized neurosis. The mean ages of the groups at risk were not significantly IPSO prognosis different (44.6 years for patients with well organized neurosis vs 47.9 for those with poorly organized neurosis, p = 0.14).
Mental characteristics. Table 7 shows the relative risk of breast cancer associated with these characteristics. In the univariate analysis, four items appeared to be closely related to the nature of the tumor: free-floating anxiety, excessive self-esteem, unresolved past grief and unresolved recent grief. However, according to a multivariate logistic regression analysis that took account of all the mental characteristics, and epidemiological factors studied, three parameters were found to be related to the risk of breast cancer: excessive self-esteem, which was associated with a 13.2 fold higher risk of breast cancer, unresolved recent grief, associated with a 10.9 fold higher risk, and a hysterical disposition, which became a significant risk factor (RR = 5.4, p = 0.03). Free-floating anxiety and unresolved past grief were no longer related to the risk of breast cancer.
Overall results. Lastly, we performed a multivariate logistic regression analysis using a stepwise forward procedure that took account of all the psychological and epidemiological factors. The results (Table 8) clearly showed the impor3.8(1.0-14.9) 0.06 13.2(1.9-91.7)
0.006 tance of fundamental mental structure in the risk of breast cancer (RR = 1.2 to infinity, p = 0.009). In addition, excessive self-esteem (RR = 10.0, p = 0.02), hysterical disposition (RR = 7.5, p = 0.02) and unresolved recent grief (RR = 8.2, p = 0.05) were the mental characteristics that remained the most strongly related to the risk of breast cancer.
The results of this study suggest that there is a relationship between psychological factors and the risk of breast cancer.
The strategy used enabled us to overcome several methodological weaknesses which had undermined the credibility of previous findings in this field. Thus, the fact that the psychosomatic evaluation was carried out before any radiologic and/or cytologic examination of the clinically detected tumor, and that the participating physicians had been instructed not to give the patient any information about the presumed nature of the tumor, ensured that, when the patients were interviewed, the psychosomaticians had no idea whether the tumors were benign or malignant. Similarly, physicians were only informed of the results of the psychosomatic evaluations at the end of the study, which was monitored by a member of our team (ML) who did not participate in either the clinical or psychosomatic examinations. As stated in the Introduction, this double-blind design was further reinforced by the choice of a homogeneous population of patients with breast tumors.
As expected, certain problems were encountered, notably the refusal of some patients to undergo the psychosomatic evaluation. However, we found the patients who had a secondary cause of exclusion had similar characteristics to those who were included. The two groups also comprised similar proportions of breast cancer cases, which as already mentioned, reduced the likehood of obtaining biased results. The strict criteria for inclusion in the trial, even after the widening of the age-group considered, explain the relatively small number of patients studied. In practice, patients are referred to a specialist after undergoing mammography. Here, however, this was a criterion for exclusion, for the reasons stated above.
As regards the relationship between the risk of breast cancer and the main epidemiological factors, which was apparently the opposite to that usually reported, the reason may be that our controls unlike those in standard epidemiologic studies, had benign breast disease. It is possible that their general practitioners referred them to cancer specialists in particular when they had at least one risk factor for breast cancer. Consequently, if the psychosomaticians had based their prognosis on the known risk factors, this would have increased their margin of error rather than helped them to arrive at a good prognosis.
It is worth noting that age at interview did not play a significant role in determining either the IPSO prognosis or the fundamental structure of the patient, since the mean ages for the low and high risk study groups were not significantly different.
The present results underline the importance of fundamental mental structure in relation to breast cancer, because no case of this disease was observed among the patients with well organized neurosis, but 18 cases were diagnosed among the patients with poorly organized neurosis. The reason is that patients with well organized neurosis benefit from a capacity for continued mental functioning which allows them to cope with serious stressful situations.
In the present study, unresolved recent grief, excessive self-esteem and hysterical disposition were associated with a significant risk of breast cancer regardless of age and major epidemiologic factors.
The major difficulties of this type of study lie in deciding whether any differences discerned by the psychological investigation between the groups with and without cancer are truly uninfluenced by foreknowledge or suspicion of the true diagnosis by the patient, and even if they are not, whether they are causally related to development of the cancer, rather than epiphenomena produced by the cancer acting on the patient. Indeed, in our study, the psychosomatic evaluation was performed after the occurrence of breast cancer. However, it should be remembered that the IPSO typing is based on a precise evaluation of the subject's behavioral characteristics persisting throughout adult life and reactions to traumatic events that occurred long before the disease was detected. In addition, all the women included in our study had a breast tumor. Therefore, even though most of them (all except four) did not actually tell their doctor they though they had cancer, they were obviously all afraid that they had, whether they were cases or controls. Lastly, it should be emphasized that before the study started, we explained to the participating physicians that it was of capital importance not to reveal to the patients anything at all about their (the physicians') clinical impression regarding the probable diagnosis of the tumor.
As regards unresolved recent grief, this has often been reported to be a risk of increased mortality and cancer,1523 although some studies showed little increase among bereaved spouses in the risk of mortality24 or no increase at alL25,26
A large scale epidemiologic survey of mortality recently conducted among bereaved parents in Israel27 showed that the mortality among this group did not exceed that of the general population. It should, however, be remembered that this type of large scale survey takes account of mortality but not of the serious morbidity that follows grief.
Our study was much more restricted, as it was confined to a single primary tumor-breast cancer-irrespective of its clinical evolution towards either death or cure. It covered far fewer subjects and was designed to establish whether or not fundamental mental structure plays a part in resistance or susceptibility to breast cancer. For these reasons, it is hard to compare with the Israeli survey. Nevertheless, it is interesting to note that in this survey, the double loss of a husband (by death or divorce) and of a child, increased mortality significantly, thus proving the importance of psychological factors, at least in cases of major stress.
Our choice of breast cancer was determined by the probability that relationships exist between hormonal regulation and psychosomatic factors. The biological reality of a psychosomatic network is becoming increasingly clear, thanks to the intermingling shown between the different types of regulation governing the hormonal, immune, hematopoietic and neurological systems.28-29
The pathogenic mechanism by which recent loss might generate cancer is far from clear. The period elapsing between the initiation of the first abnormal cells and the clinical emergence of cancer is known to be very long. However, the different stages in this long process of cancer development in man are not known, so that in the case of our breast cancer patients, it is impossible to given any physiopathological explanation of the effects of the losses that occurred during the two years before their first consultation. We do not know, for instance, whether these losses enhanced immune deficiency, increased tumor growth factor production or aggravated certain hormonal disturbances. It is conceivable that vulnerable fundamental mental functioning plays the most important role in the predisposition to serious diseases such as cancer. Unresolved recent grief may represent an acute biological condition which allows the clinical expression of the underlying pathogenic process.
Excessive self-esteem, which was found in our study to be the second most important psychological risk factor after fundamental mental structure, has also been designated in previous studies.5 In particular, the case-control study of 160 subjects by Greer et al.30 showed the importance of the abnormal release of emotions, especially anger, which is probably related to excessive self-esteem.
Hysterical disposition is a psychological risk factor which has not, to our knowledge, been previously reported as such, even in the retrospective IPSO survey.9 It is interesting to note that here, its importance was revealed by multivariate analysis and that its effect was to stabilize the overall statistical data.
Unlike certain investigators4-6-31'32 we did not find that depression was a significant risk factor (p = 0.40). However, depression is a term that is not always easy to define; for example, it is not certain that standard psychometric evaluations really discriminate between the various types of depression that have been described by psychiatrists. Thus, in their retrospective studies,9 Marty and coworkers stressed the pathogenic importance of essential depression, but even this type of depression was not found to be significant here, in our double-blind prospective study, in which Marty and coworkers also participated. This proves that the psychosomaticians' evaluation was not biased by their previous findings.
Taken together, the present results show that it is possible to evaluate the probability of a breast tumor being benign or malignant solely by a psychosomatic examination. They also show that neither patients' age nor their prior knowledge of the diagnosis and consequent behavior, nor again, recognition by the psychosomaticians of the usual epidemiologic risk factors of breast cancer, had any chance of influencing the psychosomaticians' prognosis.
In conclusion, our study raises the question of the usefulness of subjective methods such as psychosomatic evaluation compared to standardized psychometric methods such as the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory rating.32 It also provides a means of identifying the psychosomatic profiles of women with a high or low risk of developing breast cancer, thus opening the way to the study of the role of biological differences in determining the physiological or pathological functioning of the psychosomatic network.
We wish to thank Colette Delteil for her excellent secretarial assistance and Mathilde Dreyfus for her editorial help. We also wish to express our gratitude to B.R. Cassileth Ph.D. for her most helpful comments.
