Introduction. Obesity is associated with risk of breast cancer after menopause. Circulating levels of leptin are high in obesity and leptin stimulates growth of breast cancer cells. Material and methods. In a case-control study nested within the Northern Sweden Health and Disease Cohort, we measured leptin levels in prediagnostic plasma from 149 postmenopausal women who were diagnosed with breast cancer at a mean time 1.7 years (SD 2.0) after recruitment and among 258 control subjects. Results. No significant association between plasma levels of leptin and breast cancer risk was observed. Odds ratios (ORs) of breast cancer with increasing levels of leptin were 1.00 referent, 1.01 95% CI = 0.58-1.84, 0.65 0.36-1.18, and 0.94 0.53-1.67, and (pfor trend = 0.54). Adjustment for smoking, body mass index, and plasma insulin did not affect risk estimates. Discussion. These data do not support the hypothesis that plasma leptin is a risk factor for breast cancer.
Obesity and reproductive events leading to an increase in reproductive lifetime are established risk factors for breast cancer . In case control and prospective cohort studies, body mass index (BMI, weight/height2), as a measurement of obesity, has relatively consistently been associated with increased risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women and with decreased risk in premenopausal women . The most consistent body-size predictor for postmenopausal breast cancer has been adult weight gain, and high physical activity has rather consistently been associated with a decrease in risk of postmenopausal breast cancer . The effect of obesity on breast cancer development has been ascribed to an excess of free estradiol due to an increased conversion of androgens into estrogens through aromatisation in the adipose tissue and by decreased levels of sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) . An alternate or supplementary hypothesises is that other hormones produced by adipocytes, including leptin, can be important for the increase in risk associated with obesity . Leptin is hormone whose circulating levels closely reflect the percentage and amount of adipose tissue, with a correlation coefficient around 0.8 between serum leptin and various measurements of body fat . During weight loss, the relative decrease in circulating leptin levels is larger than the relative decrease in adipose tissue, and the level of physical activity is inversely related to circulating levels of leptin . Leptin levels are closely related to nutritional status and leptin conveys information to the brain about the size of energy stores . In addition, leptin seems critical for pubertal maturation and has been implicated in steroid hormone production in ovarian granulosa cells . Leptin also activates the sympathetic nervous system and is involved in regulation of blood pressure, angiogenesis, and wound healing . Notably, leptin consistently stimulates the proliferation of benign and malignant epithelial breast cells in vitro as measured by DNA synthesis, cellular density and up-regulation of downstream regulators of cellular proliferation . We hypothesized that leptin is a risk factor for postmenopausal breast cancer, mediating the effects of obesity on cancer development.
Subjects were recruited to the northern Sweden health and disease cohort study (NSHDC) through the Västerbotten Intervention Project (VIP), the northern Sweden part of the WHO study for Monitoring of Trends and Cardiovascular Disease Study (MONICA), and the Mammary Screening Project (MSP). Details of the study design have been reported before . The procedures for blood collection, processing, and storage were the same in three subcohorts, except for fasting status. In brief, blood was collected at the time of recruitment, centrifuged, aliquoted, frozen and preserved in a −80◦C biorepository. Blood samples from the majority of study subjects, in the VIP and MONICA, were obtained in the morning, and fasting time before blood donation was more than 8 h in 62%, 4–8 h in 28%, and less than 4 h in 10%. In contrast, in the MSP none of the women had been asked to fast, and 94% had fasted for less than 4 h before blood donation. All participants gave written consent for use of their blood samples in future research projects, and the study was approved by the research ethical committee of Umeå University Hospital.
Incident cases of breast cancer and deaths from all causes in the NSHDC cohort were identified through linkage with the Cancer registry and the Cause-ofDeath registry. We used plasma from 149 women who had been diagnosed with breast cancer after recruitment and who were postmenopausal at the time of recruitment (i.e., blood collection) . The number of case subjects recruited were in VIP 64, in MONICA 3, and in MSP 82. A majority of women in MSP had donated the blood sample at the time of the screening procedure that initiated the work-up that diagnosed their cancer. Consequently, the number of women that were diagnosed within three months from the time of blood collection was much higher in MSP (61) than in the other subcohorts, the corresponding number was 11 in VIP and none in MONICA. Mean lagtime for the subcohort were for VIP 3.0 years (SD 2.1), for MONICA 4.9 years (SD 1.7), and for MSP 0.5 years (SD 0.7).
Two controls were selected from subjects alive and free of cancer at the time of diagnosis of the case in each respective subcohort, and matching the index case on age (±6 months), date (±2 months) at recruitment and menopausal status. Controls were randomly selected within each group of eligible subjects if more than two subjects matched to the case were identified. For a 40 cases, only one eligible control was found.
Leptin concentrations were determined by a double antibody radioimmuno assay (Linco Res., St Louis, MO, USA) in heparinised plasma. For quality control, analytical batches included three standard sera. Intrabatch coefficients of variation (CV) were between 2 and 7% and inter-assay CV were between 1 and 5%. Data from a separate study on insulin were used in multivariate analysis. Measurement of insulin levels were made with reagents from Sanofi Diagnostics Pasteur (Marnes la Coquette, France) in immunoradiometric assays, the average intra-batch and between batch CV was 8 and 4%, respectively .
The laboratory personnel were blinded as to the case-control status of the plasma samples. Samples pertaining to matched study subjects were analysed together in the same batch (i.e., on the same day and with the same immunoassay kit).
Pearson’s partial coefficients of correlation adjusted for age, and case-control status were used to examine cross-sectional relationships between leptin, insulin and BMI. Pair-wise t-tests were used to test for differences in analytes between the case and the mean value for the two matched controls. Geometric means were used for leptin and insulin as the distribution of data was scewed for these analytes. Odds ratios (ORs) for disease were calculated by conditional logistic regression for quartile or tertile levels of leptin.
Quartile and tertile cut-off points were determined on variable distributions of cases and controls combined.
Confidence intervals (95%) were computed using the standard errors of the pertinent regression coefficients, Values are means and (5–95% range). BMI = body mass index. Data was missing on BMI for 36 subjects, and on insulin for three subjects. Controls were matched to case for age, date of recruitment, and fasting status.
a Geometric means. Conditional logistic regression analyses of cases and controls matched for age, date of blood sampling and menopausal status. First quartile is referent quartile. OR = odds ratio. 95% CI = 95% confidence interval. ptrend = test for trend with variable coded as scores. a Adjustment for smoking status coded as current smoker, ex-smoker and never-smoker.
b Adjustment for BMI and insulin by inclusion into model in quartiles. assuming a normal probability distribution for the estimated coefficients. Reported p-values are two sided.
Multivariate models were used to test for possible confounding by inclusion of the confounder into the model in four categories. The logistic regression analyses were performed using the ‘PHREG’ procedure for proportional hazards regression of the Statistical Analysis System (SAS) .
The mean levels of leptin for cases were slightly lower in VIP (15.0 ng/mL) than in MONICA (19.9 ng/mL) and MSP (18.0 ng/mL). The mean age in each subcohort for cases and controls combined was for VIP 58.2 years (SD 4.1), for MONICA 55.2 years (1.1), and for MPS 61.2 years (5.6). Baseline characteristics for cases and controls in the full study group are shown in Table 1. There were no statistically significant differences between cases and controls in levels of plasma leptin, insulin or BMI. Leptin was strongly correlated to BMI, r = 0.70, (p < 0.0001), and insulin r = 0.53, (p < 0.0001).
In conditional logistic regression analysis, we found no significant change in ORs of breast cancer in relation to circulating levels of leptin. The OR for top versus bottom quartile of leptin was 0.94 95% CI = 0.53–1.67, (pfor trend = 0.54), (Table 2). The ORs for leptin levels remained essentially unaltered after single or combined adjustment for smoking, BMI, and insulin. There was no significant interaction between BMI and leptin in their effects on breast cancer risk (p = 0.53). The risk estimates for leptin also remained virtually unchanged when adjustments were made for the number of full-term pregnancies, age at menarche, age at menopause, and time since menopause (data not shown). In subgroup analyses Conditional logistic regression analyses of cases and controls matched for age, date of blood sampling and menopausal status. OR = odds ratio, 95% CI = 95% confidence interval. ptrend = test for trend with variable coded as scores. First tertile is referent tertile. according to age at diagnosis, no associations between leptin and risk were observed (Table 3). In order to investigate the effect of the extreme levels of leptin on breast cancer risk, we estimated the OR associated with the highest decile (10%) of leptin. OR for top decile of leptin versus all other deciles combined was 1.14 95% CI = 0.60–2.19.
In this prospective study, no significant association between levels of plasma leptin and risk of postmenopausal breast cancer was observed. Thus, we found no support for the hypothesis that leptin is of key importance for breast cancer development. This contrasts to reports from several experimental studies .
In recent reports, leptin receptors have been detected in human breast epithelial cell lines, breast-cancer derived cell lines (T47-D and MCF-7) and in human breast cancer tissue specimens by RT-PCR, in-situ hybridization, and immunoblotting . In four experimental studies, leptin consistently stimulated human breast epithelial cell lines and breast cancerderived cell lines, resulting in increased DNA synthesis evaluated by thymidine incorporation test and increased cellular growth estimated by cellular density . Several down-stream effects of leptinsignalling leading to cellular proliferation were also observed. These effects included increased expression of phosphorylated signal transducers (STAT3), extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), mitogenactivated protein kinases (MAPK) and transcript activator protein (AP-1), and also increased expression of cyclin dependent kinase-2 and cyclin D1, two cell-cycle regulating proteins.
Low levels of leptin or decreased leptin signalling have been associated with a decrease in tumour development in animal models. In genetically obese mice that either were leptin-deficient or were leptin receptor-deficient, a decreased incidence of spontaneous mammy tumours was thus observed . In animals treated with caloric restriction, a reduced rate of spontaneous tumours and tumours induced by carcinogens was observed and these animals also had large reductions in circulating levels of leptin . In line with this, a decrease in circulating levels of leptin has also been observed in humans treated with caloric restriction .
Angiogenesis is an important factor in breast cancer development, and leptin stimulates angiogenesis . In vitro, leptin induced endothelial cell proliferation, and in vivo, leptin induced angiogenesis in corneas from normal mice but not in animals without functional leptin receptors . Furthermore, there was a distinct synergy between leptin and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and between leptin and fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) on promotion of angiogenesis .
To the best of our knowledge, our study on postmenopausal breast cancer is the first prospective study on the association between circulating leptin and breast cancer risk. The prospective design of our study ensured that cases and controls were recruited from the same, well-defined source population and also that the handling of all samples were identical. Samples were drawn before the case had been diagnosed, thus avoiding effects of therapy, psychological stress, or lifestyle changes after the disease had been diagnosed. Reliable measurements of leptin concentrations by radioimmuno assays can be made in cryopreserved samples of plasma, and heparinised plasma has been reported to give the best preservation . A single measurement of circulating leptin levels appears to reflect an individual’s long-term levels of leptin quite well, because even in samples taken four years apart, intraclass correlation was high (r = 0.74) . The mean levels of leptin and the correlation between leptin and BMI in our study were in accordance with previous reports .
Two small case-control studies have reported data on circulating leptin in relation to breast cancer risk. In a study of 75 cases, no significant association was found overall or in the postmenopausal women, but in premenopausal women an inverse relationship was found between leptin and cancer risk , and no significant association was found between risk and levels of serum leptin in a study of 83 cases of premenopausal carcinoma in-situ of the breast .
There was a large difference between the plasma levels of leptin found in our epidemiological study compared with the concentrations of leptin used in some of the in vitro studies. The mean level of plasma leptin in our full study group was 17 ng/mL, and the mean level among subjects in the highest quartile of leptin was 41 ng/mL. The concentrations of leptin that caused significant effects on cellular proliferation in the cited in vitro experiments were considerably higher ranging from 100 ng/mL , 320 ng/mL to 1.600– 160.000 ng/mL . The effect of very high leptin levels on epithelial breast cells and breast cancer cells may be different from the effects of high levels within a physiological range. Future studies need to elucidate what levels of leptin that are needed in human breast tissue for cancer stimulation, and also to what degree plasma levels of leptin reflect tissue concentrations in the breast.
In this prospective study, we found no significant association between levels of plasma leptin and risk of postmenopausal breast cancer and the ORs remained essentially unaltered after adjustment for smoking, BMI, insulin and factors related to reproductive lifetime, and also in subgroup analyses according to age. The risk estimates in our analyses were close to 1 and the 95% confidence intervals were rather narrow. Our results do not support the hypothesis that leptin is a mediator of the effect of obesity on risk for breast cancer.
The study was funded by grants from The Nordic Cancer Union, Swedish Cancer Society, and Lions Cancer foundation. Åsa Ågren is data coordinator at the Medical Biobank at Umeå University Hospital. Karin Hjertkvist provided technical assistance in immunoassays.
