journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/envres
A R T I C L E I N F O
A B S T R A C T
In the present case-cohort study based on prospective data from Danish women, we aimed to estimate the main effect of polymorphisms in genes known to be involved in the steroid hormone metabolic pathway and xenobiotic metabolism on the risk of developing breast cancer. We also studied a possible effect measure modification between genotypes and levels of serum perfluoroalkylated substances (PFASs) on the risk to breast cancer. We have previously reported a weak association between serum PFASs levels and the risk of breast cancer for this study population of Danish pregnant nulliparous women as well as in a smaller case-control study of Greenlandic women.
The study population consisted of 178 breast cancer cases and 233 controls (tabnulliparous and frequency matched on age) nested within the Danish National Birth Cohort (DNBC), which was established in 1996-2002. Blood samples were drawn at the time of enrollment (6-14 week of gestation). Serum levels of 10 perfluorocarboxylated acids (PFCAs), 5 perfluorosulfonated acids (PFSAs) and 1 sulfonamide (perflurooctane-sulfonamide, PFOSA) were measured. Genotyping was conducted for CYP1A1 (Ile462Val; rs1048943), CYP1B1 (Leu432Val; rs1056836), COMT (Val158Met; rs4680), CYP17A1 (A1→ A2; rs743572); CYP19A1 (C→ T; rs10046) by the TaqMan allelic discrimination method.
In overall, no significant associations were found between the investigated polymorphisms and the risk of breast cancer in this study among Danish women. The previously found association between PFOSA and risk of breast cancer did vary between different genotypes, with significantly increased risk confined to homozygous carriers of the following alleles: COMT (Met), CYP17 (A1) and CYP19 (C).
Conclusion:Our results indicate that polymorphisms in COMT, CYP17 and CYP19 which are involved in estrogen biosynthesis and metabolism can modulate the potential effects of PFOSA exposure on the development of breast cancer.
Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women in Denmark, with an age-standardized incidence rate of 99.8 per 100,000 women year during year 2009-2013 (NORDCAN data base ).
Many of the established risk factors for breast cancer are related to lifetime exposure to estrogens . Apart from hereditary genetic factors e.g. mutations in the BRCA-1/2 genes, the risk is increased by early menarche, late menopause, obesity after menopause, alcohol intake, smoking and high fat intake . Other factors that seem to reduce the risk are earlier age at first birth, the number of full term pregnancies, breastfeeding, and physical activity. However, the known risk factors only “explain” less than a third of all cases and the risk of breast cancer is probably modified by lifestyle and environmental exposures .
Several candidate genes are of interest for their possible role in breast cancer risk, including members of cytochrome P450 (CYP). They are involved in synthesis and metabolism of estrogen as well as metabolism of xenobiotics. Variations including single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in these genes that might affect the circulating levels of estrogens and oxidized reactive intermediates are hypothesized to modulate the individual susceptibility to breast cancer risk. Such candidate genes include cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A1, CYP1B1, Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), 17α-hydroxylase and 17, 20lyase (CYP17) and aromatase (CYP19) (Fig. 1).
CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 play important roles in the first step detoxification of xenobiotics as well as metabolism of estradiol to the 2-hydroxy and 4-hydroxy catechol estrogen metabolites (2-OH-E2 and 4-OH-E2), respectively. Metabolic activation of numerous pro-carcinogens such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons by cyp1A1 generates reactive epoxide intermediates that might increase the risk of oxidative stress and cancer . At the same time, CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 genes are inducible by some environmental chemicals via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor . The estrogen metabolite, 4-OH-E2, is highly estrogenic and carcinogenic in animal models and increased expression in neoplastic mammary tissue was observed .
Several SNPs have been identified in CYP1A1, including the A to G transition at position 4889 in exon 7 resulting in a change from an isoleucine to valine amino acid (Ile →Val) at codon 462 . This variant is reported to be significantly associated with CYP1A1 inducibility and higher enzyme activity that might cause higher rates of carcinogen activation. In the CYP1B1 gene an important SNP (C→G) at codon 432 in exon 3 leads to an amino acid substitution of leucine to valine (Leu→Val), which increases the 4-hydroxylation activity of CYP1B1 by three fold . Despite the functional effects of some variants, the role of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 in breast cancer development remains controversial. Several meta-analyses on women from different ethnicities with breast cancer report little to no evidence that genetic variation in CYP1B1 influences breast cancer risk .
A major inactivation step for 2-OH-E2 and 4-OH-E2 catechol estrogens is the conversion to their non-genotoxic methoxy derivatives by the phase II enzyme COMT. In the COMT gene, a single G to A base pair change results in an amino acid change from valine to methionine (Val →Met) at codon 108 of the soluble form of COMT and codon 158 of the membrane-bound form of COMT. This amino acid change has been associated with 3- to 4-fold decrease in enzyme activity in vitro . Still, epidemiological data on the influence of the variant COMT (Met/Met) and the risk of human breast cancer are diverse .
CYP17 is involved in the early stages of estrogen biosynthesis by converting pregnenolone and progesterone to precursors of androgens and estrogens, respectively. A common single base pair substitution (−34T→C also called A1- > A2) in the 5′ untranslated region (5’ -UTR) of CYP17 creates an additional SP1-type (CCACC box) promoter site, which is suggested to up-regulate the expression of CYP17 . However, molecular evidence did not support the suggested mechanism and the functional impact of the T/ C change is presently to our knowledge not known. Still, there are some reports indicating that the A2 allele correlates with higher serum levels of various sex steroids (e.g., testosterone, progesterone, estrone, and estradiol) mainly in premenopausal women .
The final step of estrogen biosynthesis is catalyzed by CYP19, also called aromatase, which converts androgens (testosterone and androstenedione) to estrogenic steroids (estradiol and estrone) . Aromatase has been found to be expressed at higher levels in breast tumors, and variations within the CYP19 gene may contribute to this higher expression ). A C→T base substitution in the 3´-UTR has been frequently studied, and the T allele has been associated with higher levels of postmenopausal circulating E2 and related to breast cancer risk in some ethnicities .
Previously we conducted a nested case-control study within the Danish National Birth Cohort (DNBC) to examine the potential role of serum levels of perfluoroalkylated substances (PFASs) in premenopausal breast cancer. The perfluorinated alkyl acids are extremely persistent and resistant to metabolism in the human body, and have low elimination rate. The mean human serum half-lives has been estimated to be 2.3-3.5 years for PFOA, 5.4-6.7 years for PFOS and 7.7–8.5 years for PFHxS as studied in retired fluorochemical production workers followed over time . In overall, we found a weak positive association between levels of perfluorooctane sulfonamide (PFOSA; adjusted RR 1.05, 95 % CI 1.00–1.09) and a weak negative association between levels of perfluorohexane sulfonate (PFHxS; adjusted RR 0.67, 95 % CI 0.451.01) in serum drawn early in their pregnancy and risk of breast cancer diagnosed 10-15 years later . These associations were further strengthened upon stratification for age at diagnosis for women younger or 40 years of age and particularly in the highest 5th quintile of PFOSA (adjusted RR 3.42, 95 % CI 1.25–9.36).
PFOSA is a synthetic fluorocarbon compound with grease and water resistant properties used in food packaging and other consumer products, and breaks down to perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) . PFOS has been added to Annex B of the Stockholm Convention on persistent organic pollutants . Several in vivo and in vitro studies have indicated that some PFASs may have the potential to disrupt endocrine homeostasis .
In the present study, these associations between serum levels of PFASs and breast cancer risk in the Danish women were further evaluated after stratification by genotypes for the assessment of modifying effect of genotypes on relation of PFASs with breast cancer. In overall, this study aimed to investigate 1) the potential main effect of
relation to breast cancer risk and 2) gene-environment interactions on how genetic variations and exposure to PFASs jointly influence the risk of breast cancer.
The study design, population and characteristics have previously been described in detail . Briefly, the study was designed as a case-cohort study nested within the Danish National Birth Cohort (DNBC), which is a nationwide cohort study including more than 100,000 pregnancies from 1996 to 2002 . By linkage to the cancer registry, 250 nulliparous women were identified with diagnosed breast cancer after recruitment to DNBC. The 250 women diagnosed with breast cancer and 233 controls (nulliparous and frequency matched on age; taken at random from the entire cohort at baseline) were selected for further PFAS analyses. Blood drawn between 6th to 14th gestation weeks was used for analyses of PFASs. The used questionnaires on lifestyle (including diet, height, weight, diseases in the family, use of oral contraceptives, smoking and alcohol intake) are available in an English translation at DNBCs homepage (www.DNBC.dk). However, 72 of these breast cancer cases were withdrawn from the current Danish National Patient Register possibly due to a coding error making their breast cancer status uncertain for this study. Therefore, in the present study the 72 cases were omitted from the study population and the total number of women for PFAS measurements was 178 cases and 233 controls.
As previously published, serum concentrations of sixteen PFASs were determined using an established liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry at the Department of Environmental Science, Aarhus University . The PFASs included ten perfluorocarboxylated acids (PFCAs, C5 to C14): perfluoro-n-pentanoic acid (PFPeA), perfluorohexanoic acid (PFHxA), perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA), PFOA, perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA), perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA), perfluoroundecanoic acid (PFUnA), perfluorododecanoic acid (PFDoA), perfluorotridecanoic acid (PFTrA), perfluorotetradecanoic acid (PFTeA)); five perfluoroalkylsulfonates (PFSAs, C4 to C10: perfluorobutane sulfonate (PFBS), perfluorohexane sulfonate (PFHxS), perfluoroheptane sulfonate (PFHpS), PFOS and perfluorodecane sulfonate (PFDS)) and one sulfonamide (perflurooctane-sulfonamide, PFOSA). Details of the method and the information about the performance (detection limits, precision, and bias) and the results from the participation in the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP) Ring Test has previously been published .
Genomic DNA was obtained from the DNBC biobank at Statens Serum Institute (SSI), and used for genotyping of the following SNPs: CYP1A1 Ile462Val (rs1048943), CYP1B1 Leu432Val (rs1056836), COMT Val158Met (rs4680), CYP17 T-34C (rs743572) and CYP19 C > T (rs10046). For 72 of the women (38 controls and 34 cases) DNA was not available in sufficient quantity. Table 1 shows the specifications of these SNPs.
Genotyping was performed using TaqMan Drug Metabolism Genotyping Assays, following manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems, ABI) as previously described . Positive controls consisting of DNA representing wild-type/wild-type (wt/wt), wt/variant and variant/variant genotypes and negative controls (no DNA) were included in each assay run.
The percentages of samples that could not be successfully genotyped probably due to the quality of the DNA was 0.9% for CYP1A1 Ile462Val, 6.5% for CYP1B1 Leu432Val, 5.6% for COMT Val158Met, 2.6% for CYP17 T34C and 0.9% for CYP19 C > T. Thus, the numbers reported for some different polymorphisms vary from the total.
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was tested for the different genotype frequencies in controls using the χ2 –test. The χ2 –test or Fisher's exact tests were used to compare categorical variables (allele and genotype frequencies, smoking status, breastfeeding etc.) between cases and controls where appropriate.
The relative risks (RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated from unconditional logistic regression models for the association between breast cancer and SNPs, and the interaction between SNPs, each of the PFAS variables and breast cancer risk. For SNP analyses, genotypes were coded as counts of the variant (var) allele (wt/wt=0; wt/var=1 and var/var=2) and the common homozygous (wt/wt) genotype was used as reference group. The genotyping data were also categorized into two groups (dominant model): common homozygous (wt/wt; referent) and heterozygous+ variant allele homozygous genotypes (wt/var+var/var). The heterozygous and homozygous variant alleles were combined in order to ensure a better sample size for comparisons.
The PFAS variables were natural logarithmic transformed to make the distribution more symmetric and these were used in the logistic regression models. For all PFASs, the detection limits were calculated, and the exact given concentration was used if the value was above this limit. If the value was below the detection limit, we assigned a value given by the detection limit divided by two. Only the PFASs that were detected above detection limit in all samples were used for statistical analyses: PFOS, PFHxS, PFOSA and PFOA. For the remaining PFASs, the levels were below detection limits in 0.2-99.4% of the blood samples, and all the details were given previously (BonefeldJorgensen et al. 2014b).
For the association between PFASs and breast cancer the model was adjusted as previously for known breast cancer risk factors including age at blood drawing, body mass index (BMI) before pregnancy, total numbers of gravidities, oral contraceptive use, menarche age, smoking status, alcohol intake, maternal education and physical activity. For the association between SNPs and breast cancer, the model was adjusted for age at blood drawing and also for the above mentioned breast cancer risk factors.
Subjects with missing data (see previous section: “Genotyping”) for a particular SNP were excluded from the respective analysis.
Interactions between genotypes and each of the PFAS variables were analyzed by comparing the RRs of each PFAS variable on risk of breast cancer stratified by genotype for each SNP. P values for deviation from the multiplicative interactions were derived from the interaction term for gene and PFAS exposure (continuous variable) introduced into the model. In addition to the continuous exposure variable, each exposure variable was dichotomized into two categories, “low” or “high”, based on their median levels found in the controls.
Furthermore, deviations from the multiplicative statistical model were tested for the categorical exposure variable by calculating the RRs for women with neither the high-risk genotype nor high exposure as the reference group (RR00), for women with both genotype and high exposure (RR11), for persons with the high exposure alone (RR01) and for women with the high-risk genotype alone (RR10). Under the definition of interaction on multiplicative scale there is no interaction if RR11 = RR01 × RR10 and positive interaction if RR11 > RR01 × RR10.
All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 22 statistical
Tabel 1 Specifications about the studied polymorphisms. wt: wild-type; var: variant.
a TaqMan Drug Metabolism Genotyping Assay. b 432Val variant has the higher 17β-estradiol hydroxylation activity, but lower carcinogenic activity . c A2 is postulated to correlate with higher serum levels of various sex steroids . d variant alleles T has been associated with higher levels of postmenopausal circulating E2 . software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). A two sided p-value ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant in the analyses.
Selected socio-demographic characteristics of study cases and controls were published previously and the table is updated for this study population (Table 2).
In general, no large differences were observed between cases and controls except that cases were slightly older at the time of blood drawing (30.4 vs. 29.6 years) and had a slightly lower BMI compared to controls (e.g. BMI before pregnancy: 23.0 vs 23.8 kg/m2).
Overall, none of the genotype distribution of the investigated SNPs differed between cases and controls in this study (Table 3).
In Table 4, the serum levels of PFASs by genotypes are given. The mean concentrations of PFASs were not significantly different between the women with different genotypes (case and controls separately). No statistical significant gene-dose effect was observed.
For the assessment of modifying effect of genotypes on relation of PFASs with breast cancer, the associations between serum levels of PFASs and breast cancer risk were further evaluated after stratification by genotypes (Table 4). The association for PFOSA was different for each of the genotype strata with some reaching statistical significance.
For CYP1B1, the RR associated with PFOSA was stronger among women with genotype Leu/Leu and Val/Val compared with those being heterozygous (Leu/Val).
The PFOSA associated RR was elevated significantly for women homozygous for COMT low-activity Met variant (Met/Met) (RR: 2.04, 95% CI: 1.27-3.28), women homozygous for CYP17 common A1 (A1/ A1) (RR: 2.02 95%CI (1.29-3.16), and homozygous for CYP19 common C allel (C/C) (RR: 2.08 (1.06-4.09). It is noteworthy that the RR increased with the number of the mentioned risk alleles for COMT, CYP17 and CYP19. The multiplicative interaction term for PFOSA level with either genotype in the logistic regression model was only statistically significant for COMT (Pinteraction= 0.048), as shown in Table 4.
No significant interaction between PFHxS and genotypes were found but the results showed that higher PFHxS was associated with lower breast cancer risk significantly only in women with either CYP1B1 Val/Val, COMT Val/Val, CYP17 A1/A1 and CYP19 CT genotypes.
Stratification for CYP19 genotype and the interaction term sugCharacteristics n
Case
Mean
BMI: Body mass index; OC: Oral contraceptive use; TTP: Time to pregnancy. Statistics: Independent t-test was used to compare the graphical continuous variables (age, BMI, pregnancies, TTP, menarche age, alcohol intake (wine and beer) and maternal physical activity. Pearson’s chi-square test was used to check the difference between cases and controls for OC use, smoking, maternal education status. Significant p values ( < 0.05) are given in bold. gested that PFOA (Pinteraction = 0.047) and PFOS (Pinteraction = 0.055) was associated with breast cancer risk only in carrier of homozygous CYP19 CC genotype (wt) (Table 4). The results for the categorical exposure data which mainly showed the same tendency as the analyses with continuous exposure data are presented in Table S1 in the supplementary material.
We also explored the combined effects of the genes by introducing multiplicative interaction terms of two SNPs at the time into the model but none showed any significant results.
High Val (var) Valb (var) Val (wt) A2c Td(var) p 0.332 0.013 0.046 0.049 0.310 0.417 0.474 0.602 0.420 0.909 0.365 0.135 a All adjusted: adjusted for known risk factors including matching factors: age at blood drawing; BMI before pregnancy; total number of gravidities; oral contraceptives use; age of menarche; smoking status during pregnancy; alcohol intake during pregnancy; physical activity; maternal education.
b The analysis is not performed for cells with less than n < 5. * p-value for comparison between the 3 genotypes (wt/wt; wt/var; var/var) using χ2-analysis.
** p-value for comparison between the homozygous wt/wt and wt/var+var/var (dominant model).
We have previously reported a weak and positive association between PFOSA serum concentrations measured 10-15 years before diagnosis and the risk of breast cancer for the present case-control study .
In the current study, no significant main effect was found between the investigated polymorphisms and the risk of breast cancer in the Danish women. Generally, the positive association between PFOSA and risk of breast cancer varied within some genotype strata, but only with significantly slightly increased risk among homozygous carriers for the following alleles, COMT (Met), CYP17 (A1) and CYP19 (C).
The logistic regression analyses with PFAS exposure as categorical variable (low vs high), mainly supported the results obtained with continuous exposure variables.
Previously, both in the present study population of Danish women , as well as in Inuit Greenlandic women we found an association between PFAS serum levels (PFOSA and PFOS) and the risk of breast cancer, and it was found that the genetic polymorphisms in CYP1A1 (Val) and CYP17 (A1) increased the breast cancer risk among Inuit women in Greenland . PFASs have also been linked with a range of reproductive health effects which points to endocrine disruptive activities and with effects being of potential relevance for risk of breast cancer such as:
(1) genotoxic potentials in vitro , (2) tumor promotion in vitro and in rodents including reduction in mammary differentiation and increase in mammary fibroadenomas , (3) hormone disruption in vitro including increased estrogen levels .
Therefore it is biologically plausible that PFASs with genotoxic and hormonally active potential can contribute to the risk of cancer in hormone-sensitive tissue such as the breast.
Since high and prolonged exposure to estrogens is an established risk factor for breast cancer functional SNPs which can change the levels of estrogen or its metabolite are expected to play a role but findings have been inconsistent, presumably due to differences in study population on genetic background, age, environmental exposure profile and tumor characteristics.
Many studies have investigated the modifying effects of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 polymorphisms on breast cancer risk due to their dual role in both xenobiotic and estrogen metabolism and production of carcinogenic intermediate metabolites. The frequency of the variant allele of CYP1A1 was very low among controls (0.014) and therefore we had no power to detect any association between CYP1A1 and breast cancer risk.
In Caucasians the variant CYP1A1 Val/Val genotype was associated with a higher risk of breast cancer in two meta-analyses , but not in another . In some studies the association was only confined to smokers . The results could be related to the reported inducibility of CYP1A1 polymorphism in smokers and the role of CYP1A1 in metabolism of the environmental carcinogens rather than metabolism of estrogens. In our previous case-control study in Inuit women from Greenland, we found that the genetic polymorphism in CYP1A1 (Val) was positively associated with the breast cancer risk . However, comparison should be considered cautiously as Inuit and Caucasians are genetically different and the Inuit had much higher allele frequency of CYP1A1 Val (0.460) compared to Caucasians . In our previous study among Inuit, the PFOS and PFOSA associated breast cancer risk were higher among carriers of at least one of the CYP1A1 Val allele , suggesting an effect measure modification by the genotype.
CYP1B1 may contribute to the pathogenesis of breast cancer by the conversion of E2 into 4-OH-E2 or by Ca: case; Co: control ; CI: Confidence interval; RR: relative risk; p-interaction: cross-product term between gene and PFAS exposure (-) could not be determined for cyp1A1, because of few numbers.
Boldface indicates statistically significance at p < 0.05.
a adjustet for known risk factors including matching factors: age at blood drawing; BMI before pregnancy; total number of gravidities; oral contraceptives use; age of menarche; smoking status during pregnancy; alcohol intake during pregnancy; physical activity; maternal education.
b P-interaction is drived from cross-product term in logistic regression. bioactivation of carcinogens. In our study of Danish women we observed no associations between the CYP1B1 polymorphism and the risk of breast cancer, which is consistent with a recent meta-analysis but not with others that suggested an association to CYP1B1 Val/Val genotype . However, we would have expected a main effect of CYP1B1 polymorphism, since an amino acid change from Leu to Val was suggested to increases the 4-OH enzyme activity of the CYP1B1 . Though, the AHH activity to form reactive metabolites from procarcinogens was shown to be slightly higher in the Leu form . Therefore, it is plausible that both Val/ Val and Leu/Leu carriers are more at risk for developing breast cancer compared to heterozygous subjects. In this study we observed increased RR associated with PFOSA levels only in women with CYP1B1 genotype Leu/Leu and Val/Val and not in those with heterozygous genotype (Leu/Val).
COMT inactivates the catechol estrogens produced by CYP1A1 and CYP1B1, and change in enzyme activity can change the inactivation rate and possibly the breast cancer risk .
Individuals carrying the low activity COMT variant (Met/Met) may be at increased risk for breast cancer through increased accumulation of the genotoxic catechol estrogen intermediates (2-OH-E2 and 4-OHE2). In our study COMT Val158Met polymorphism was not an independent risk factor for breast cancer. However, we observed that the risk of breast cancer associated with serum levels of PFOSA was higher among homozygous carriers of the Met/Met genotype with an apparent risk-allele dose effect. As discussed in our previous papers , several in vivo and in vitro studies have indicated that PFASs may have endocrine disrupting and genotoxic potential in vitro . In rats, exposure to PFASs including PFOS and PFOA, was reported to increase the estradiol level and reduce thyroid hormone levels (reviewed in ). Serum levels of PFOSA was indeed reported to correlate with increased serum E2 in lactating women and resulted in a dose-responsive increase in estradiol in an in vitro assay . We hypothesize that PFOSA or PFOS induces the E2 levels and consequently production of higher amount of catechol estrogens which may accumulate in carriers of COMT Met/Met. Additionally, it was shown that E2 can down-regulate the COMT expression and activity in MCF-7 breast cancer cells via the estrogen receptor possibly through the present estrogen response elements in the promoter region of COMT . Other xenoestrogenic compounds such as catechol metabolites of PCBs and phthalates were shown to reduce COMT protein expression and activity .
Therefore, it is likely that PFOSA/PFOS can affect the COMT expression which inducibility might be different according to the polymorphism.
In the present study the CYP17 (A1 > A2) polymorphism was not associated with breast cancer risk. In some studies, the A2 variant has been suggested to cause differences in circulating hormone levels and potentially influence the risk of breast cancer . A Meta analyses showed that, although not significantly, A2 was positively associated with risk of breast cancer in post-menopausal women, but inversely related to breast cancer in pre-menopausal women . Similar to our previous results in Inuit women , a study of Finnish population found a tendency of lower risk of breast cancer risk for premenopausal women carrying at least one CYP17 A2 allele.
Although in this study of Danish women, CYP17 did not affect the breast cancer risk independently, we observed that the risk related to PFOSA was elevated in women with CYP17 A1/A1 genotype, which is consistent with our previous findings among Inuit women . The study populations in both of our studies (Danish and Inuit women) consisted mainly of premenopausal women, whether that can explain our observation of association to A1 instead of A2 need further research.
Some in vitro studies reported that PFOA and PFOS interfere with the cyp17 gene expression and whether the change in gene expression is associated to the SNP of interest in this study is unknown.
The CYP19 polymorphism (C > T) has been extensively studied in different populations, due to its role in converting androgens to estrogens. It has been postulated that variation in CYP19 might affect et al. 2009) and another study revealed an association between C allele
higher associations with serum levels of PFOA and PFOS among the level of estrogens, and presence of the CYP19 C allele was shown to associate with reduced estradiol levels in postmenopausal women . The relation to breast cancer is not consistent, as a study reported that CYP19 TT genotype was significantly associated with increased breast cancer risk among Chinese women (Zhang and breast cancer risk in Spanish women . We found no effect of CYP19 polymorphism in the present study, but the breast cancer risk related to PFOSA was confined to women homozygous for CYP19 C allele (wt). Additionally, we found significantly women with CC genotype compared to those with TT, although the confidence interval was very wide. It is unclear how this SNP interacts with the serum levels of PFASs in relation to breast cancer risk. A study showed that shorter chain PFBS inhibited the CYP19 aromatase activity in vitro , and other studies found that PFOS and PFOA increased the estradiol level and reduced the testosterone level in vitro by interference with steroidogenic enzyme gene expression (cyp19 and cyp17) . Whether the degree of inhibition is allelespecific remains to be elucidated. Similar to higher levels of estrogens, higher levels of androgen also correlates with increasing risk of breast cancer .
Our study has a number of strengths including its design using prospective data allowing us to avoid biases present in many retrospective study designs and the availability of DNA and genotype data on a nested sample. There are limitations of this study related to the degree of heterogeneity of the cases, which may have compromised the power of the study if the exposure is only causal for subtypes of breast cancer. We do not have information on case characteristics such as tumor size, nodal status, in situ versus invasive, and immunohistochemical markers, i.e. ER, PR, and family history. Also the small study size limits the power.
Moreover, we realize that our study is not adequately powered to test gene-environment interactions, but despite the power issue, we think that our study can contribute to gaining insight into the biological and toxicological mechanisms involving in the modifying effects of susceptibility genes and their roles in developing breast cancer in relation to perfluorinated compound exposure.
In overall, we did not find an independent effect of the examined SNPs on breast cancer risk in Danish women, but an association with the exposure to PFOSA combined with the risk alleles for COMT, CYP17 and CYP19 was observed. Our studies in Inuit and Danish women support the hypothesis that the effect of PFAS exposure might be different for different genotype. This is not surprising that the effect of low-penetrance genes can be minor, since breast cancer is a multifactorial disease that involves interaction between multiple genetic and environmental factors. Therefore, studying gene-environment interaction is important to elucidate the breast cancer risk.
Our result indicates that inter-individual polymorphic differences in genes involved in estrogen synthesis and metabolism may modify the association between environmental exposure to PFOSA and breast cancer risk. However, the study is too small to provide stable and convincing data on interaction. A larger sample size is needed to reach a better estimate on this part of the study.
Conflict of interests
We thank the International Polar Year Committee (IPY Project # 167), the Commission for Scientific Research in Greenland and the Danish Environmental Agency for financial support. Also thanks to the foundations of DNBC. We thank all the member of the Centre for Arctic
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2017.01.020.
