Purpose: Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) is one of the major enzymes implicated in the cellular defence against reactive oxygen species. Low expression of MnSOD has been observed in different cancer tissues and several reports have shown that overexpression of MnSOD inhibits growth in various human cancer cells. These observations suggest that MnSOD is involved in carcinogenesis. A polymorphism (Ala-9Val) in the mitochondrial targeting sequence (MTS) of the MnSOD gene has been proposed to affect protein localization and thereby influence cellular defence against superoxide radicals. Methods: In the present case-control study, including 118 early onset breast cancer patients ( £ 36 years) and 174 age-matched controls, the MTS polymorphism and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the locus of MnSOD were analysed. Results: We found that individuals with MnSODVal/Val and MnSODVal/Ala genotypes showed an increased risk of breast cancer (OR, 2.7; 95% CI, 2.25.5, p=0.01, OR, 3.0; 95%CI, 1.4-6.5, p=0.002). Moreover, 45% of the informative cases expressed allelic loss at the chromosomal locus of the MnSOD gene. No correlation was found between LOH and the genotype. Conclusion: The present study suggests that MnSOD may be implicated in breast carcinogenesis in young women.
Both early and late onset breast cancer are multifactorial diseases, and the genesis and progression of most breast cancers are influenced by both environmental and genetic factors. A family history of breast cancer seems to be the greatest risk factor, especially for early onset breast cancer, and the risk is a function of the number of affected relatives, the degree of relationship, and the time of onset . Other significant and wellknown risk factors that are indicators of cumulative endogenous and/or exogenous oestrogen exposure include: low age at menarche, late menopause, nulliparity, high age at first full-time pregnancy, and use of oestrogen replacement . Presently, the most well-known genetic factors implicated in breast cancer are germ-line mutations in the breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 . However, only a small proportion of all breast cancers are a consequence of hereditary mutations in one of these genes, and the origin of a large proportion of both familial and sporadic breast cancers is still unknown. Naturally occurring genetic variations, which are fairly common in the population, may be other modifiers of breast cancer risk.
Substantial data indicate that oxidative stress is involved in the development of breast cancer . Oxidative stress is the result of an imbalance between the amount of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the capacity of the antioxidant defence systems. ROS may attack DNA bases or deoxyribose residues to produce damaged bases or strand breaks, and oxidize lipid or protein molecules to generate intermediates that react with DNA to form adducts . Increased levels of ROS can affect the redox status, and an overall oxidative milieu tends to increase protein phosphorylation and favour cell proliferation . The most common ROS in the cell is the superoxide radical, which is produced during oxidative phosphorylation within the mitochondria. A key enzyme in the antioxidant defence system is manganese containing superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), which catalyses the scavenging of superoxide radicals. The MnSOD enzyme is located mainly in the mitochondral matrix and converts superoxide radicals to hydrogen peroxide, which in turn are metabolized into water by gluthathione peroxidase or catalase. The MnSOD gene is located at the human chromosome segment 6q25.3 . A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the mitochondrial targeting sequence (MTS) in the MnSOD gene was reported . The SNP (GCT/GTT) encodes different amino acids, Alanine (Ala)/Valine (Val), calculated to result in different secondary structures. The Ala variant is predicted to form an a-helical structure between residues 10 and 17, while the Val variant results in a b-sheet conformation . Alterations in the MTS structure may affect the transport of the enzyme into the mitochondria . The Val iso-form may be less efficiently transported into the mitochondria, due to poor signal sequence recognition by a receptor in the inner mitochondrial membrane, and thus provide an insufficient defence against superoxide radicals . The MTS polymorphism may therefore cause inter-individual differences in MnSOD protein localization.
Several reports have shown that overexpression of MnSOD, by transfection of MnSOD cDNA, inhibits growth in various human cancer cells, including malignant melanoma , oral squamous carcinoma , prostate carcinoma , lung fibroblasts , and breast cancer . In addition, evidence of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at the chromosomal locus 6q25-26 in human cancers suggests that the MnSOD protein acts as a tumour suppressor.
The aim of the present study was to examine the role of MnSOD in early onset breast cancer. The MTS polymorphism was analysed in cases and controls to determine whether the Val variant was associated with increased breast cancer risk in young women. Furthermore, the growth inhibiting effect of transfected MnSOD cDNA proposes a tumour suppressor property; we therefore analysed LOH at the chromosomal locus of MnSOD.
The study included 123 consecutive young breast cancer patients diagnosed in the southeast Sweden Health Care Region. At the time of diagnosis, the patients were between 22 years and 36 years of age, with a median of 34 years. Tissue samples were obtained from the pathology departments in the southeast Sweden. One hundred and four healthy female blood donors between 18 years and 39 years of age (median age 30 years) and 70 women from a population-based DNA bank (22– 39 years, median age 32 years) were used as the control population. Both groups were collected in southeast Sweden and genotypes were compared using a chisquare test.
Five-micrometre sections from paraffin blocks of axillary lymph nodes and tumours were stained with haematoxylin-eosin. For each case, both lymph nodes without cancer cells and tumour tissue with a high content of cancer cells were selected by a pathologist. DNA was isolated from the corresponding 30-lm paraffin embedded sections by repeated extractions with xylene and ethanol and digestion with proteinase K, as described earlier . DNA from the control populations was isolated using a rapid DNA preparation method (Wizard Genomic DNA Purification System, Promega). The leucocytes were suspended in a nuclei lysis solution and proteins were precipitated and removed by centrifugation. The DNA was then precipitated in isopropanol. The pelleted DNA was washed with 70% ethanol, dried, and finally resuspended in 10 mM Tris–HCl/1 mM EDTA (pH 4.0).
donor controls A 248 base pair DNA fragment of the MnSOD gene, including the part of exon 2 containing the polymorphism, was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Amplification was performed using forward primer (5¢-AGCCCAGCCTGCGTAGA-3¢) and reverse primer (5¢GGTACTTCTCCTCGGTGACG). PCR reactions were carried out in 20-ll aliquots containing 25–50 ng of genomic DNA from lymph nodes, primers (1.0 lM), 1x reaction buffer, MgCl2 (2 mM), dNTPs (each 200 lM), and 1 unit of Taq polymerase (Promega). We performed 30–40 cycles of PCR amplification, with denaturation at 93 C for 45 s, annealing at 55 C for 1 min, and extension at 72 C for 1 min. An initial 3-min denaturation step at 94 C and a final 4-min extension at 72 C were used. Sequence analyses were performed using a Thermo Sequenase Radiolabeled Terminator Cycle Sequencing kit with termination at addNTP33 (Amersham Biosciences, Sweden), followed by electrophoresis on denaturating polyacrylamide (6%) gels. Identification of Val/Ala alleles in the population 93 C for 45 s, annealing at 57–64 C for 1 min, and based controls extension at 72 C for 1 min. A 3-min initiation step at 94 C and a final 4-min extension at 72 C were used.
Polymerase chain reaction reactions were carried out The amplicons were then labelled with a-dATP33 in a with the same conditions as for the patient- and blood PCR of 13–15 cycles. The alleles were separated by donor-control population samples, with the exception electrophoresis on denaturating polyacrylamide (6%) that the forward primer (5¢-AGCCCAGCCTGCGT- gels which were exposed on a Kodax Biomax MR film. AGA-3¢) was biotinylated and primer concentrations were decreased to 0.05 lM. The biotinylated amplicons where immobilized onto streptavidin-coated super Statistical analysis paramagnetic beads (Dynabeads M280-Streptavidine, Dynal, Oslo, Norway). DNA strands were then dena- Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) turated by 0.3 M NaOH, washed, and incubated with were calculated by logistic regression to evaluate the risk the sequence primer. Immobilization, denaturation, of breast cancer for individuals homozygous or heterowashing, and primer annealing steps were performed zygous for the predicted risk allele, MnSODVal and p using a PSQ96 Sample Prep tool. Reaction was per- values were calculated by chi-square analysis. Furtherformed using a PSQ96 SNP Reagent Kit (Pyrose- more, chi-square analysis was used to investigate if there quencing AB) including the four enzymes: DNA were any significant differences in allelic frequencies polymerase, ATP sulfurylase, firefly luciferase, and the between the two control populations. Finally, chi-square nucleotide-degrading enzyme apyrase. The immobilized analysis was used to investigate whether the control single-stranded DNA template, the substrates adenosine populations were consistent with the Hardy-Weinberg 5¢-phosphosulfate (APS), luciferin, sequencing primer 3¢- equilibrium.
AAACCCCATAGACCCGAGG-5¢, and dNTP:s were also added. Pyrosequencing reaction was then carried out in a PSQ96 instrument. To confirm both sequencing Results methods, a subset of cases and controls were repeated and no variations within samples were obtained.
A polymerase chain reaction was carried out to amplify the micro-satellite markers, D6S264 and D6S1566, situated 6 Mbp telomeric and 2 Mbp centromeric of the MnSOD gene. The amplification was performed using the forward primer 5¢-GCTGACTTTATGCTGTTCCTCCC-3¢ and the reverse primer 5¢-TGAAAATTGTTCTATTCTGTGATGCC-3¢ to amplify the marker D6S264, and the forward primer 5¢-CTAGGGGACTCTTCAGCAG-3¢ and reverse primer 5¢-CATTCAGACCATAGTGGAGG-3¢ to amplify the D6S1566 marker. PCR reaction was carried out in 20-ll aliquots containing 25–50 ng of genomic DNA from the tissue of tumours or lymph nodes, primers (1.0 lM), 1x reaction buffer, MgCl2 (2 mM), dNTP:s (each 200 lM), and 1 unit of Taq polymerase (Invitrogen). The PCR reaction was repeated in 30–40 cycles with denaturation at MnSODAla allele = a-helix targeting sequence MnSODVal allele = targeting sequence with b-structure Genotype data for the MnSOD polymorphism were available for 118 young women with breast cancer, 104 blood donor controls, and 70 controls from the DNA bank. The genotype frequencies in the two control groups were compared and no significant difference was found. Therefore, we regarded them as one control population. Moreover, the genotype dispersal in the pooled control population was within the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
The OR and the corresponding 95% CI for the genotypes were derived from logistic regression analysis. Individuals homozygous and heterozygous for the MnSODVal allele showed an increased risk of breast cancer (OR, 2.7; 95% CI, 2.2–5.5, p=0.01, OR, 3.0; 95% CI, 1.4–6.5, p=0.002, respectively) (Table 1). The attributable fractions were 0.64 for MnSODVal/Val and 0.66 for the MnSODVal/Ala genotype.
In the LOH analysis, we completely revealed 83 informative cases, and allelic losses were observed for at least one marker in 37 cases (45%). Figure 1 shows genotype, loss, and retention of heterozygosity in cases OR 1.00 2.97 2.75 2.90 95% CI 1.39–6.46 1.18–5.51 1.39–6.14 p 0.002 0.01 0.002 informative for both micro-satellite markers. The markers D6S1655 and D6S264 showed 30 (45%) and 14 (38%) cases with LOH, respectively. No correlation between genetic polymorphism and LOH was found (Table 2).
The alanine-to-valine polymorphism in the MTS of the MnSOD protein was calculated to alter the transport into the mitochondria and thereby reduce the removal of cancer-causing ROS. Investigation of the polymorphism in the present case-control study of young women (n=118, median age 34) with breast cancer and an agematched control population resulted in an odds ratio of 2.7 for homozygous carriers of the MnSODVal allele. This suggests an implication in the onset of the disease. However, this is in contrast to a report by who genotyped the MTS polymorphism in premenopausal breast cancer patients (n=114, mean age 46) and found a factor of three to four increase in the risk of breast cancer associated with the MnSODAla/Ala genotype. Comparing the present study with Ambrosone et al., allele frequencies in control populations and sample size were similar, but differences in genotype distribution in cases and time of onset can be observed. Moreover, if health condition is associated with the polymorphism of the MnSOD, the use of healthy individuals as control population in our study may result in a genotype distribution apart from that in the total population. Another important factor with a high potential to influence the results is sample size; however, the MTS polymorphism is frequent and therefore an acceptable power is achieved despite the limited number of cases and controls. Finally, the discrepancy of risk between these studies may also be due to different pathways in carcinogenesis for early and late onset of disease, or due to linkage disequilibrium of the polymorphism to another cancer-prone gene in proximity to SOD2.
The MTS polymorphism has been investigated in two large breast cancer cohorts of both pre- and postmenopausal women, and no correlation to increased risk was found . These studies suggest that the alanine allele modifies the risk of breast cancer among smokers and in individuals who have received high doses of radiation to the chest. Among postmenopausal breast cancer patients, both and reported an OR less than 2.0 for homo- and heterozygous carriers of the MnSODAla allele. Recently-performed association studies in other types of cancer showed contradictory results. In studies of hormone-dependent organs, such as ovary and prostate, data support a role for the alanine allele in the development of cancer , while the presence of the valine allele is associated with an increased risk of bladder and lung cancer . The mixed results from different populations show no unequivocal role for the MTS polymorphism in carcinogenesis.
Several studies have shown that increased activation, through transfection of the MnSOD cDNA, inhibits growth in various human tumour cells , suggesting that downregulation might be an important step towards an uncontrolled cell growth. We demonstrated a relatively high (45%) frequency of LOH in the chromosomal region of the MnSOD gene. This observation confirms results from earlier studies reporting frequent allelic deletions in the 6q25-26 chromosome area in breast , ovarian , and lymphoma . The observations of LOH support that this locus is active in cancer development and a potent carrier of genes involved in carcinogenesis. However, the presence of LOH in markers D6S1655 and D6S264 was not associated with genotype, possibly as a result of too few observations or that LOH may be a consequence of another cancer-prone gene in the chromosomal region.
Reports of the distribution of MnSOD allelic frequencies differ widely between ethnic populations. and van Landeghem et al. (1999) reported MnSODAla allele frequencies of 12% and 30% in a Japanese and Chinese population, respectively, while the figures appeared to be considerably higher in Caucasians (approximately 50%). Significant variations in the MnSOD alleles’ frequencies have also been reported between language groups: Baltic (Lithuanian), Finnic (Finnish and Saamis), and Germanic (Swedes from northern Sweden) . Saamis and Lithuanians showed a high frequency of MnSODAlal/Ala (62% and 56%, respectively) while the allele frequency in Swedes was somewhat lower (41%). The allelic distribution in the control population, which was collected from the southeast of Sweden in the present study, showed slightly different figures (50%). However, as cases and controls were collected from the same geographic area, these types of differences were not an issue and the genotype dispersal in our control subjects was within the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
We investigated a population of young ( < 36) breast cancer patients, which in epidemiological terms is a comparatively small sample size due to low incidence rate. For early onset breast cancer, a strong genetic impact on the origin of the disease has been suggested . Therefore, identification of modifier genes, associated with a more modest cancer risk and high prevalence in the population, may be one important step forward in defining genetic risk factors for early onset breast cancer. However, ethical aspects have to be considered before screening of low penetrance genes. As indicated in the present study, the MnSODVal allele may be one candidate which can be used as an indicator of risk for early onset of breast cancer. Nevertheless, our findings need confirmation in a study with an extended number of cases and a selection of controls with disease susceptibility as in the general population.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by grants from the Swedish Cancer and Allergy Society, the Regional Cancer Society of O¨ tergo¨ land, the research funds at the University Hospital of Linko¨ ping, Lions Research Foundation, and the Research Council in southeast Sweden.
