The relationship between breast cancer and radiation treatment for cervical cancer was evaluated in an international study of 953 women who subsequently developed breast cancer and 1,806 matched controls. Radiation doses t o the breast (average 0.3 I Gy) and ovaries(average 32 Gy) were reconstructed for exposed subjects on the basis of their original radiothera y records. Overall, 88% of the breast cancer cases and 8 9 2 of the controls received radiation treatment relative r i s k (RR) = 0.88; 95% confidence interval I C,0I3)7=c0o.n7-t1r.o2l1s.), radiotherapy was linked t o a significant 35%
Among women with intact ovaries (561 cases, reduction in breast cancer risk, attributable in all likelihood t o the cessation of ovarian function. Ovarian doses of 6 Gy were sufficient t o reduce breast cancer r i s k but larger doses did not reduce risk further. This saturation-type response is probably due t o the killing of a critical number of ovarian cells. Cervical cancer patients without ovaries (I45 cases, 284 controls) were analyzed separately because such women are at especially low natural risk for breast cancer development. In theory, any effect of low-dose breast exposure, received incidentally during treatment for cervical cancer, should be more readily detectable. Among women without ovaries, there was a slight increase in breast cancer risk (RR = 1.07; 95% CI = 0.62.0), and a suggestion of a dose response with the RR being I.O, 0.7, I.5 and 3. I for breast doses of 0,0.01-0.24,0.25-0.49 and 0.50+ Gy, respectively. However, this trend of increasing RR was not statistically significant. If low-doseradiation increasesthe risk of breast cancer among women over age 40 years, it appears that the risk is much lower than would be predicted from studies of younger women exposed t o higher doses.
Although breast cancer is one of the most thoroughly studied consequences of radiation exposure, there are few data on risk following relatively low doses of radiation or on risk among women over 40 years of age when exposed . Women with cervical cancer represent a valuable population for study because the dose to the breast, received incidentally during radiation therapy, is well under 1 Gy, and the average age at diagnosis is about 50 years. Cervical cancer patients also possess characteristics, such as multiparity, which act to lower breast cancer risk . Patients whose ovaries have been surgically removed are at an even lower risk because cessation of ovarian function is known to protect against breast cancer development (Feinleib, 1968; Trichopoulos et al., 1972). Because the background rate of breast cancer is so low among women with cervical cancer, any 38Towhom reprint requests should be sent at: Executive Plaza North, Suite 408, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval(s); df, degrees of freedom; Gy, gray = 100 rad; kVp, kilovolts peak; ML, maximum likelihood; PY-Gy, person-years of observation multiplied by the average dose in gray; RR, relative risk. radiation effect should, in theory, be more readily detectable than among women at higher natural risk of breast cancer. Previous reports from our international study of women with invasive cancer of the uterine cervix focused on the relationship between radiation dose and leukemia and between radiation dose and second cancers at 18 other organ sites . In this report we provide detailed dose-response information on 953 women who developed breast cancer following treatment for cervical cancer and on 1,806 individually matched controls.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS
Incident breast cancer cases and matched controls were selected from among 150,000 patients with invasive cervical cancer who were followed by 17 oncology centers and 19 population-based cancer registries in 14 countries B.ecause the minimum time for radiationinduced breast cancers to appear is about 5 years , only women who survived for at least 5 years after cervical cancer diagnosis were eligible for study. Within cancer registries, record-linkage techniques were used to select breast cancer cases and controls. In most clinics, patient follow-up was necessary to identify breast cancers and to create rosters of surviving patients eligible for control selection. Overall, 953 cases and 1,806 matched controls were chosen. The registries contributed 607 (64%)breast cancers and clinics contributed 346 (36%).
Two matched controls per case were chosen on the basis of race (in the United States only), age and calendar year of cervical cancer diagnosis, survival, and center. The control had to have survived without developing a second cancer for at least as long as the period between diagnosis of the initial cancer of the cervix and the diagnosis of the breast cancer for the corresponding case. All controls were chosen from the same clinic or cancer registry as the corresponding case.
Diagnoses of breast cancer reported by cancer registries were accepted, in large part, since most registries follow stringent guidelines for acceptance of second primary cancers .For breast cancers identified in the European clinic records, pathology review was conducted by the physicians and other trained reviewers who abstracted the medical records. In several clinics, separate slide reviews were conducted by local pathologists. All abstracts and other materials submitted in support of the diagnosis of breast cancer were again reviewed by the study pathologist (H.L.). In the US clinics, the same pathologist reviewed all questionable diagnoses as well as a random sample of eligible breast cancers. The rate of pathologic confirmation, including autopsy, was 83%. Overall, 33% of the breast cancers were adenocarcinomas, 32% were carcinomas, 31.4% were intraductal carcinomas and 3.6% were other histologic types.
Throughout this century, patients with cervical cancer have been treated with radiation with various combinations of external beam and/or radium implants, depending upon stage of disease and the prevailing practices of the time. The estimation of radiation doses received by individual patients has been described . Based on individual patient treatment records, typical external beam and intracavitary treatments were simulated and breast doses in an Alderson Rando phantom were measured. The medical physicists did not know whether patients were cases or controls. The breasts were sufficiently far from intracavitary radiation sources for relatively precise estimates of organ doses to be made. The dose to the ovaries was calculated using a computer program in routine clinical use (Stovall, 1968).
All available dosimetric information was assigned a quality score by one medical physicist. A “very good” score indicated that the records were complete and that information on external beam and intracavitary treatment was sufficient to obtain reproducible radiation dose estimates. Problems would be classified as “minor” or “major” depending upon the extent of missing treatment details and the availability of similar records within the same hospital from which probable treatment parameters could be estimated. “Incomplete” meant that although information on a certain modality or subsequent therapy was missing, there were sufficient details in the available record to compute a probable “minimum” dose. Data classified as incomplete or “minimum” dose were not included in the dose-response analyses.
Conditional logistic regression methods were used to compare radiation exposure in cases with individually matched controls, accounting for variable matching ratios . The measure of association used to evaluate the effect of radiation on breast cancer risk was the relative risk (RR) as approximated by the odds ratio. Matched stratum-specific analyses included tests of homogeneity and tests of trend of the RR over discrete categories of the variable of interest. Multivariate analyses were also conducted to evaluate the possible effect modification of the matching factors on radiation risk. A significant p value would indicate that the additional variable had a modifying effect on cancer risk in addition to the previous variables in the model. It should be stressed, however, that the risk of breast cancer associated with age, calendar year, or latency per se could not be estimated, since these were matching factors, and only their modifying effect on radiation risk could be evaluated. Absolute risk estimates were crudely approximated as (RR-l)I/D, where RR was taken as the relative risk for an average dose (D) and I was the expected incidence of breast cancer, estimated from the previous cohort analyses for the approximate person-years of observation (Boice et al., 1985~).
Because women with and without ovaries are at different risks for developing breast cancer, they were analyzed separately. Ovarian status was defined as to whether a bilateral oophorectomy was recorded any time up to one year after the diagnosis of cervical cancer. Slightly more than 15% of the cases and controls had documented evidence of a bilateral oophorectomy. Unmatched analyses were conducted with adjustment for most stratification variables, such as age, time, calendar year, and center. The maximum likelihood estimator of the unmatched RR and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated according to the method of Gart (1970). Matched and unmatched analyses did not differ appreciably, and only the unmatched analyses are presented for those evaluations that take ovarian status into account. Although information on breast cancer risk factors was abstracted, the data were largely incomplete and detailed evaluations were thus precluded.
RESULTS
Seventeen clinics and 19 population-based cancer registries contributed data on 953 second breast cancers and 1,806 matched controls from a combined population of over 150,000 women with cervical cancer (Table I). Radiation treatment was not known for 5 cases and 6 controls, and these patients were excluded from all tabulations and analyses. The average age at cervical cancer diagnosis was 52 years, and 30% of the women were under age 45 years when treated (Table TI). Approximately 19% of the women were diagnosed as having cervical BREAST CANCER FOLLOR'ING CERVICAL CANCER TABLE I - NUMBER OF WOMEN WHO DEVELOPED BREAST CANCtK FOLLOWING CERVICAL CANCER AND THEIR MATCHED CONTROLS BY CENTER AND TREATMENT'
Breast cancercases
Radiotherapy Yes
No
Controls Radiotherapy Yes
No Center number cancer prior to 1950. The earliest reported treatment was in 1920. Keeping in mind that only 5-year survivors were eligible for study, 38% of the breast cancers that developed among study subjects occurred between 5 and 10 years after treatment for cervical cancer, and 62% developed more than 10 years after treatment. Over 70% of the cases and controls had either stage I or stage I1 cervical cancer, and 65% were treated with both intracavitary isotopes and external beams. Radium was the most commonly used intracavitary source. The most common external beam therapy was orthovoltage (63%), followed by cobalt-60 (20%). Prior t o 1950, 65% of all women were treated with orthovoltage, whereas only 12% received such treatment after 1965. Almost 90% of the information on radiotherapy was judged to be of sufficient completeness to enable relatively precise estimates of doses to the breast and ovaries. Radiation dose to the breasts was estimated to be 0.31 Gy on average, and the average dose to the ovaries was 32 Gy. The maximum breast and ovarian doses received were 0.98 Gy and approximately 100 Gy respectively.
Overall, radiation treatment for cervical cancer was associated with a reduced risk of breast cancer (RR = 0.88; 95% CI = 0.7-1.2). There was a suggestion that the radiation risk was modified, or varied somewhat, by time since treatment, calendar year of diagnosis, and treatment center (Table 111). Although none of the differences were statistically significant, radiation treatments after 1965 and those occurring in US registry areas appeared to convey somewhat higher risks than treatments in earlier years or in other centers.
Among women with ovaries (561 cases, 1,037 controls), radiotherapy was linked to a significant 35% reduction in breast cancer risk (Table IV). The deficit remained significantly low 20 years after exposure. Risk was not seen to vary appreciably by calendar year, type of treatment, or radiation dose to the breast. The risk of breast cancer by radiation dose to the ovaries is shown in Table V and Figure 1. Ovarian doses less than 6 Gy did not reduce risk (RR = 1.12), whereas higher doses significantly reduced risk. After ovarian doses of about 6 Gy, increasing levels of exposure did not provide additional reductions in risk. Among women whose ovarian status could not be determined, the RR was 0.65 (95% CI = 0.3-1.7).
TABLE II - CHARACTERISTICSOF WOMEN WHO DEVELOPED BREAST CANCER FOI.LOWING CERVICAL CANCER AND THEIR MATCHED CONTROLS
Characteristic Time since cervical cancer diagnosis (yr)' 510152025330
4 5 45553 6 5
< 1950 1950196021965
I I1 111-IV
Unknown
External beam only Intracavitary only External beam and intracavitary None
Missing or unknown
Orthovoltage (200-400 kVp) Cobalt-60 Megavoltage (LINAC) Betatron
Unknown
used for dosimetry
Very good Good, only minor problems Fair, but major problems Incomplete information No information
38.4 27.0 17.0 9.7 5.2 2.7 28.4 37.3 24.2 10.1 19.4 37.6 24.5 18.5 37.6 35.4 12.8 14.2 3.5 19.1 65.3 12.0 0.1 62.9 20.2 6.1 4.4 6.4 78.0 9.7 6.7 2.4 3.2 25.5 9.5 6.4 'For the women who developedbreast cancer, this represents the interval between date of cervical cancer diagnosis and date of breast cancer. Each matched control lived at least as long as the case.
TABLE III - MATCHED RELATIVE RISK OF BREAST CANCER ASSOCIATED WITH RADIOTHERAPY' FOR CERVICAI.
CANCER BY VARIOUS PATIENT AND TREATMENTCHARACTERISTICS AND B E A S T DOSE. FOR ALL WOMEN
Number
IReference category: women with cervical cancer (both cases and controls) not given radiotherap~.-~c5ases and 6 controls could not be ~lassified.-~For1 case and 1 control who received low-dose radiotherapy, the resulting dose to the breast was estimated to be less than 0.01G~.-~Radiatiornisk appeared to he modified somewhat by time after treatment, calendar year of diagnosis of cervical cancer, and treatment center.
Among women whose ovaries were removed prior to or within one year after the diagnosis of cervical cancer, there was a slight increase in breast cancer risk (RR = 1.07; 95% CI = 0.6-2.0) following an average dose of 0.26 Gy (Table VI). Risk appeared to increase somewhat with increasing dose to the breasts (p = 0.10) and reached 3-fold for doses greater than 0.50 Gy (Fig. 2). Risk also seemed to increase with time since exposure and was highest among women followed for more than 15 years. In contrast to women with intact ovaries, dose to the anatomical area where the ovaries would have been located was not associated with a reduction in risk (Table V, Fig. 1). The effect of age at exposure on breast cancer risk
TABLE ZV - UNMATCHED RELATIVE RISK OF BREAST CANCER ASSOCIATED WITH RADIOTHERAPY' FOR CERVICAL CANCER BY VARIOUS PATIENT AND TREATMENT CHARACTERISTICS AND BREAST DOSE, FOR WOMEN WITH OVARIES' 'Reference category: women with cervical cancer not given radiotherapy.-'No bilateral oophorectomy prior to or within 1 year after cervical ~ancer.-~Adjustedfor time since diagnosis of cervical cancer, calendar year of diagnosis, and ~enter.-~For one case who received low-dose radiotherapy, the resulting dose to the breast was estimated to be less than 0.01 Gy. among women without ovaries is shown in Table VII. For each age category, risk appeared to increase with increasing dose to the breast. However, all of these subgroup analyses were based on small numbers. For women without ovaries, an estimate of the excess RR per Gy can be computed as 27%. The estimated RR at 1 Gy would be 1.27. An estimate of the excess absolute risk would be 0.8 excess breast cancers per 104 PY-Gy. These estimates, however, are subject to substantial uncertainty.
DISCUSSION
Among cervical cancer patients with intact ovaries at the TABLE V - UNMATCHED RELATIVE RISK OF BREAST CANCER BY RADIATION DOSE TO THE OVARIES AND OVARIAN STATUS NEAR THE TIME OF TREATMENT OF CERVICAL CANCER 'Unmatched RR adjusted for age, time since diagnosis of cervical cancer, and calendar year of diagnosis.-*Radiation dose was estimated to the anatomical site where the ovaries would lie had they been present.
RR' l o r 1471 151 1191 1691 1 11281 11311 11441-IN" CASES1 3.0 l o r i 1531 ICI 1121 ,181
I i .
TABLE VI - UNMATCHED RELATIVE RISK OF BREAST CANCER ASSOCIATED WITH RADIOTHERAPY' FOR CERVICAL CANCER BY VARIOUS PATIENT AND TREATMENT CHARACTERISTICS AND BREAST DOSE, FOR WOMEN
WITHOUT OVARIES~ 'Reference category: women with cervical cancer not given radiotherapy.-*Both ovaries were removed prior to or within 1 year after cervical cancer diagn~sis.-~Adjustefdor time since diagnosis of cervical cancer, calendar year of diagnosis, and ~ e n t e r . - ~ F oorne control who received low-dose radiotherapy, the resulting dose to the breast was estimated to be less than 0.01 Gy. time of treatment, radiotherapy was found to reduce the risk of breast cancer by 35%. A saturation-type response was suggested in that once ovarian doses of about 6 Gy were received, larger doses did not decrease further the risk of breast cancer.
Similar to studies of surgically-induced menopause (Trichopoulos et al., 1972), the protective effect was present for more than 20 years after exposure. The induction of an early menopause and the reduction of estrogen secretions following high ovarian doses undoubtedly contributed to the observed deficit.
Among women without ovaries, a dose-response relationship was suggested, indicating that doses on the order of 0.26 Gy might increase the risk of breast cancer among women whose underlying risk is especially low. However, this interpretation is made cautiously because the results were not statistically significant.
The breast is not only the most common site of cancer among women, it is also one of the tissues most susceptible to radiation-induced cancer. Excess breast cancers have been reported in surveys of tuberculosis patients who had received multiple fluoroscopic examinations of the chest ; mastitis patients given radiotherapy (Shore et al., 1986); atomic bomb survivors (Tokunaga et al., 1987); children given radiotherapy for cancer (Li et al., 1983), enlarged thymus glands (Hildreth et al., 1985), or skin hemangioma (Fiirst et al., 1988); women treated with radiation for Hodgkin's disease , breast cancer (Hankey et al., 1983), benign breast disorders (Baral et al., 1977), or ankylosing spondylitis (Darby et al., 1987); X-ray workers in China (Wang et al., 1988); and women working with radium (luminous paint) in the watch
Average dose to breast fGv) 0.26 0.26 0.26 0.31 0.21 0.24 0.27 0.28 0.41 0.17 0.22 0.33 0.30 0 0.14 0.31 0.34 industry . The large number of breast cancers following cervical cancer and their controls, 953 and 1,806 respectively, should have been sufficient to detect a risk following an average dose to the breasts of 0.31 Gy. However, an overall 12% deficit was observed. This reduction was not altogether unexpected, since radiation to the ovaries would be expected to reduce the risk of breast cancer by inducing an early menopause (Feinleib, 1968; Hirayama and Wynder, 1962; Trichopoulos et a l . , 1972), and thus counter any increase possibly associated with low-dose breast irradiation. Hence, women with and without intact ovaries near the time of treatment for cervical cancer were analyzed separately.
Among women with ovaries, a significant 35% reduction in breast cancer risk was found. Studies of women treated for radiation for benign and malignant disease have reported similar reductions in breast cancer risk associated with ablation of the ovaries. Our study is the first, however, to quantify the reduction in risk over a broad range of ovarian doses and ages at exposure. Ovarian doses of approximately 6 Gy are known to cause permanent infertility in most women, the effect depending upon the age of the women at exposure and the time period over which the dose is delivered . The induction of permanent infertility is considered as being due to the killing by radiation of a critical number of oocytes, i . e . , the potentially fertilizable cells from the ovary. Once a sufficiently high dose is reached, few, if any, oocytes will survive, and sterility will be permanent. The reduction in breast cancer risk associated with ovarian irradiation in our study appeared to follow a similar pattern. After a dose of approximately 6 Gy was reached, further increases in ovarian dose did not result in additional reductions in breast cancer risk.
Similar to the results of our cohort series (Boice et al., 1985a) and other studies , a reduction in breast cancer risk was also apparent among women exposed many years after the age of menopause when the effect of ovarian irradiation might not be expected to reduce breast cancer development to the same extent as at younger ages. The reasons are not entirely clear but may be related to the suppression of estrogen production by the ovarian stroma and indirectly to suppression of androgen production by the adrenal glands in post-menopausal women. While ovarian function does not stop completely after the menopause, the main source of steroid hormones among post-menopausal women is from the adrenal glands. Levels of adrenal androgens are known to vary among post-menopausal women and can be influenced by exogenous factors such as cigarette smoking (Khaw et al., 1988). In a recent study of long-term survivors of cervical cancer, serum levels of androstenedione, testosterone and estrone were found to be lower among women without ovaries who were treated with radiation, suggesting that the protective
'Reference category: women with cervical cancer not given radiotherapy.-*Both ovaries were removed prior to or within 1 year after cervical cancer diagn~sis.-~Adjustefdor time since diagnosis, calendar year of diagnosis, and center. effect of pelvic irradiation on breast cancer risk might be due in part to a decrease in steroid hormones, secondary, perhaps, to adrenal irradiation . Low androgen levels have also been linked to low risk of breast cancer in premenopausal women .
Women without ovaries, analyzed separately, represent a very low-risk group for subsequent breast cancer development, and thus any radiation effect should, in principle, be more readily detectable than among women with ovaries at higher natural risk for breast cancer. A slight non-significant excess (RR = 1.07) was seen following an average breast dose of 0.26 Gy. A causal association is supported by the suggestion of both a dose response and an increasing risk with time since exposure. On the other hand, the lack of statistical significance cautions against over-interpreting these data. It may be instructive, nonetheless, to contrast our results with those from other studies. An average dose of 0.26 Gy would have been expected to produce RR of only 1.10 to 1.26, based on studies of younger populations exposed to higher doses . Since our study could only exclude RR greater than 2.0 with 95% certainty, a risk consistent with other investigations cannot be completely discounted. On an absolute scale, however, the excess risk (0.8/104 PY-Gy) is also much lower, by a factor of about 10, than estimated in other studies of younger populations . There are few studies indicating that women irradiated past age 45 years are at risk for radiation-induced breast cancer. Risk of radiogenic breast cancer appears to be inversely related to age at exposure, with the lowest risk among the oldest women. Our data suggest that if a risk of direct breast irradiation exists among older women, it is much less than predicted from studies of women exposed at younger ages.
The possible influence of breast cancer risk factors, abstracted from the medical records of cases and controls, was evaluated to the extent possible. Each of the major breast cancer risk factors in the general population was also operating among women with cervical cancer. Parity was seen to decrease the risk of breast cancer, and obesity and a family history of breast cancer appeared to increase risk. The radiation associations, however, were not influenced by these other factors. Because of the incomplete nature of the information on breast cancer risk factors and the potential for ascertainment bias, further evaluation of these data did not seem warranted.
Our findings should be interpreted in light of several methodologic issues. The strengths of this international study include the large number of breast cancer cases, over 900, and the reasonably accurate estimation of radiation dose to the breasts and ovaries made possible because of the existence of radiotherapy records for individual patients. The limitations include the relatively narrow range of breast doses (0.01 to 0.98 Gy), and the small number of non-exposed women available for the subgroup analyses, that were necessary, for example, to account for the effect of ovarian radiation. There are problems associated with multiple primary cancer studies, such as surveillance bias and metastatic disease (Boice et al., 1985b). However, increased medical surveillance to detect a second tumor should not be a major concern in a case-control study of long-term survivors with the same disease. Further, since cervical cancers are usually squamous-cell cancers and breast cancers are primarily adenocarcinomas, it is unlikely that misclassified metastases would be an important consideration.
The risk of radiation-induced breast cancer at low doses in the medical setting continues to be of public and scientific concern . Our findings indicate that if there is a radiation risk for older women, it is much lower than for women exposed
under the age of 40, and that estimates of risk for older women based on previous studies of young women are probably overestimates (Boice, 1986).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Members of 8 working groups guided this study since its inception. The Steering Committee members were Dr. G.B.
Hutchison, Dr. H. Lisco, and Dr. B. MacMahon. The dosimetry subcommittee consisted of Ms. M. Stovall, Dr. M . Rosenstein, and Dr. G. Svensson. The pathology committee included Dr. H. Lisco, Dr. H. Tulinius, and Dr. G . O’Conor. We are grateful to Dr. R. Saracci, Dr. P.G. Smith, Dr. 0 . M . Jensen, Dr. R. Mole, and Sir Edward E. Pochin, who provided helpful advice; to Mr. S. Cangemi and Dr. C. Eastlack for computer assistance; to Mr. P. Hurwitz, Ms. B. Kramer and Ms. D.
Magnin for data collection support; and to Ms. M. Abraham and Ms. S. Schmaltz for manuscript typing. Most importantly, we are indebted to the staffs of the many participating oncology clinics, cancer registries, and medical facilities without whom this study would not have been possible. This research was partially supported by Contracts with the National Cancer Institute, of the United States Public Health Service.
APPENDIX A - PARTICIPATING CENTERS AND
RESPONSIBLE INVESTIGATORS
Location
London
FRG
Gottingen
Oslo
APPENDIX A - PARTICIPATlNG CENTERS AND RESPONSIBLE
INVESTIGATORS (continued)
APPENDIX B - PARTICIPATING CANCER REGISTRIES AND RESPONSIBLE
INVESTIGATORS (continued)
EBY,N.L., BOICE,J.D., JR.,GOLD,E.B., HOOVERR, .N. and LORIAUX,
SECRETOG, ., TONIOLOP,., PISANI,P., RECCHIONEC, ., CAVALLERAI,., FARISELLGI, ., TOTIS,A,, DI PIETRO,S. and BERRINOF,., Androgens and HILDRETHN, .G., SHORE,R.E., HEMPLEMANLN.,H. and ROSENSTEIN, breast cancer in premenopausal women. CancerRes., 49,471-476 (1989). M., Risk of extrathyroid tumors following radiation treatment in infancy SHIMIZUY,., KATO,H., SCHULLW,.J., PRESTOND,.L., FUJITA,S. and for thymic enlargement. Radiation Res., 102, 378-391 (1985). PIERCE,D.A., Life-span study report I I . Part I . Comparison of risk coeficients for site-specific cancer mortality based on the DS86 and HIRAYAMTA.,and WYNDERE,.L., A study of the epidemiology of cancer T65DR shielded kerma and organ doses, RERF TR 12-87, Radiation Efof the breast. 11. The influence of hysterectomy. Cancer, 15, 28-38 fect Research Foundation, Hiroshima (1987). (1962).
SHORE,R.E., HILDRETHN,., WOODWARDE,., DVORETSKYP,., HEMHOWE,G.R., Epidemiology of radiogenic breast cancer. In: J.D. Boice, PELMANNL,. and PASTERNACBK.,, Breast cancer among women given Jr. and J.F. Fraumeni, Jr. (eds.), Radiation carcinogenesis: epidemiology X-ray therapy for acute postpartum mastitis. J. nat. Cancer Inst., 77, and biological significance, pp. 11%129, Raven Press, New York (1984). 689-696 (1986).
HRUBECZ,., BOICE,J.D., JR., MONSONR,.R. and ROSENSTEINM, . , Breast cancer after multiple chest fluoroscopies: second follow-up of Massachusetts women with tuberculosis. Cancer Res., 49, 229-234 (1989).
HUTCHISONG, .B., Leukemia in patients with cancer of the cervix uteri treated with radiation. A report covering the first five years of an intemational study. J. nut. Cancer Inst., 40,951-982 (1968).
INTERNATIONCAOLMMISSIOONN RADIATIOPNROTECTION,onstochastic efsects of ionizing radiation, ICRP Publication 14, pp. 1-33, Pergamon, Oxford (1984).
KELSEYJ,.L. and BERKOWITZG,.S., Breast cancer epidemiology. Cancer Res., 48, 5615-5623 (1988).
KELSEYJ,.L. and HILDRETHN,.G., Breast and gynecologic cancer epidemiology, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL (1983).
KHAW,K.-T., TAZUKES,. and BARRETT-CONNOER.,,Cigarette smoking and levels of adrenal androgens in postmenopausal women. N . Engl. J.
Med., 318, 1705-1709 (1988).
KLEINERMANR.,A., CURTISR,.E., BOICE,J.D., JR., FLANNER YJ.,T. and FRAUMENJI.,F., JR., Second cancers following radiotherapy for cervical cancer. J. nat. Cancer Inst., 69, 1027-1033 (1982).
LAND,C.E., BOICE,J.D., JR., SHORE,R.E., NORMANJ, .E. and TOKUNAGMA,., Breast cancer risk from low-dose exposures to ionizing radiation: results of parallel analysis of three exposed populations of women. J. nut. Cancer Inst., 65, 353-376 (1980).
LI, F.P., CORKERYJ.,, VANTERG,., FINE,W. and SALLENS,.E., Breast carcinoma after cancer therapy in childhood. Cancer, 51,521-523 (1983).
