To test the hypothesis that osteoporosis, which results partly from long-term estrogen deficiency, is associated with a lowered risk of breast and endometrial cancer, a population-based cohort study was performed in Sweden. Some 18,000 w o m e n were followed through record-linkages after a first hip fracture, on average for almost six years, to ascertain the incidence of breast and endometrial cancer. Expected numbers were derived from the general population. Overall, 253 cases of breast cancer were observed cf300 expected (standardized incidence ratio SIR -- 0.84; 95 percent confidence interval CI = 0.74-0.95). Forty-eight cases of endometrial cancer were found cf55 expected (SIR -- 0.87, CI = 0.54-1.16). There was no clearcut pattern of breast cancer risk by age at diagnosis of hip fracture, follow-up time, or calendar period. Our results are consistent with the apriori hypothesis that long-term estrogen deficiency is associated with a reduced risk of developing breast cancer as well as endometrial cancer. Cancer Causesand Control 1994, 5, 523 - 528 I n t r o d u c t i o n
Lifetime variation of endogenous sex-hormone levels, both estrogens and progesterone, is associated with breast cancer risk.1 However, our understanding of the mechanisms of action is unclear. 2 Risk factors, such as early menarche, 3late menopause, 4 late age at first fullterm pregnancy, ~ regular menstrual cycles, 6 obesity, 7 use of combined oral contraceptives, 8 and hormone replacement therapy, 9 have implicated the role of sex hormones, albeit in an indirect and often inconsistent w a y .
More detailed hypotheses suggest that estrogen stimulation of breast tissue is an important determinant of risk in special situations, such as certain periods of a woman's life, notably during adolescence, 1~in the presence or absence of cyclically produced progesterone, 11or when the level of unbound (free) estradiol is high. 11 These hypotheses have received only limited support. ~O n e of the main difficulties in pursuing such hypotheses is the long latency period between initiating events and the occurrence of a clinically detectable tumor. Therefore, a surrogate outcome reflecting the long-term influence of sex hormones should help to clarify the etiologic role of hormones in breast cancer.
O n the other hand, endometrial cancer clearly is linked to excessive or sustained levels of estrogens, either endogenous or exogenous, that are unopposed
by natural progesterone or added progestins. 12,13Estrogens alone cause endometrial proliferation which may progress to hyperplasia and neoplasia.TM
Osteoporosis may provide a model for the study of hormonal effects. First, there is evidence that longterm, relative, estrogen deficiency15such as associated with amenorrhea,16premature menopause, and oophorectomy17 is a risk factor for osteoporosis. Second, patients who develop osteoporosis can be identified readily through the occurrence of fragility fractures, which often affect the hip.
We previously tested the hypothesis that women who had either breast or endometrial cancer would have a decreased risk of hip fractures, due to presumably higher levels of endogenous estrogens compared with the general population. No such association was found for breast cancer,TM but an overall 60 percent lower risk of hip fracture was noted for endometrial cancer.~9The aim of the present study was to test the hypothesis that osteoporotic women (with a hip fracture) have a reduced incidence of breast or endometrial cancer due to their long-term estrogen deficiency of early onset. Advantage was taken of the data resources in Sweden to perform a registry-based, record-linkage, cohort study.
The design of this study involved identification of a cohort of women who had a hip fracture diagnosed at any age and the follow-up from the date of their first hip-fracture diagnosis to ascertain the occurrence of breast and endometrial cancer.
This register, managed by the National Board of Health and Welfare (NBHW) of Sweden, has been in operation since 1965 within the six counties in the Uppsala healthcare region of central Sweden, covering one-sixth of'the total Swedish population? ~From 1965 through 1983, data on admissions to all medical institutions were reported and filed at the National Board of Health and Welfare.
The register data for each admission included a personal identifier called the National Registration Number (NRN), a 10-digit number (nine digits represent date of birth, gender, and place of birth; the tenth number is calculated as a check digit) which is unique for the individual. This provides a means for follow-up through record linkage with dates of hospital admission and discharge, International Classification of Diseases (ICD) codes on diagnoses, and numerical codes representing surgical procedures. The completeness of reporting to the registry is, according to recent surveys, about 98 percent of all admissions?1
A correct national registration number is crucial in order to achieve valid results from the linkage procedures. Eleven percent of the patients had incomplete NRNs. The NRNs were matched to a registry covering the total Swedish population22to detect the incorrect numbers. Altogether, 2.9 percent of those records, including a nine-digit number, were found faulty and were excluded. The validity of the hip-fracture diagnoses in the Inpatient Registry was evaluated by scrutinizing a sample of medical records and was found to be a c c u r a t e . 21
The Cancer Registry, also operated by the NBHW, was started in 1958.2~ Registration of cancer cases involves notification from the respective clinician as well as the pathologist (or cytologist), who are obliged to report any diagnosed cancer to the registry. The completeness of registry data has been close to 100 percent during the most recent years,2~and was around 95 percent in the first decades of its existence. The diagnoses of breast and endometrial cancers were verified histologically in 99 percent of the cases. The remaining one percent of cases were diagnosed at autopsy.
From the Inpatient Registry, a cohort of women was selected on the basis of the following criteria: (i) an admission due to a first hip fracture, at any age; diagnoses defined by ICD-724 codes 820.00, 820.01,820.20, 820.21,820.40, and 820.41 (period 1965-68) and ICD-82s codes 820.00, 820.01,820.10, and 820.11 (period 1969-83), i.e., including only acute and primary events; (ii) domicile of the patient within the Uppsala healthcare region at the time of admission; (iii) a complete and valid nine-digit N R N in the inpatient record (the tenth digit, i.e., control digit was disregarded); correct N R N was ensured by linkage to the general population register of Sweden; (iv) no patient with cancer diagnosed before the first recorded hip-fracture included.
Altogether 17,823 women met these criteria and formed the cohort for follow-up of breast and endometrial cancer incidence starting in 1965 (Table 1).
The hip-fracture cohort was followed up through record-linkage with the National Cancer Registry to ascertain the observed number of cases of breast and aAt hospital admission due to a first hip fracture. bWomen with cervical fractures contributed 76,110 and those with trochanteric fractures 28,680 person-years of observation. endometrial cancer (ICD-7 codes 170 and 172), and the Cause-of-Death Registry to establish dates of death. 26 Cohort women were observed from the first date of discharge diagnosis of hip fracture or start of the Inpatient Registry (1 January 1965). They were followed to the dates of diagnosis of either breast or endometrial cancer, death, emigration, or end of the study period (31 December 1988). Those patients dying during the hospital admission did not contribute to observation time. Person-years (PY) of observation were accrued in five-year age-groups and by calendar years (Table 1). Expected numbers of cases of breast and endometrial cancer were calculated by multiplying the respective accumulated PYs by the age- and calendar-year-specific incidence rates derived from the Uppsala Health Care Region.
The standardized incidence ratio (SIR), a comparison of observed to expected cases, was used to estimate the association between hip fracture and cancer risk. The variance of the estimates was assessed by calculating the 95 percent confidence interval (CI), based on the assumption that the observed number was distributed as a Poisson variable. SIR estimates were calculated overall, and for age at hip fracture diagnosis, time of follow-up since cohort entry, and calendar period of hip fracture diagnosis.
Women in the hip-fracture cohort contributed about 105,000 PYs with an average follow-up period 5.9 years after hip fracture (Table 1). Overall, 253 cases of breast cancer were observed compared with some 300 expected, yielding a significantly reduced risk (SIR = 0.84, CI = 0.74-0.95; Table 2). The SIRs were lowered significantly only in the cervical-fracture group, but the risk estimate was similar among women with a trochanteric fracture. Following a cervical fracture, the SIRs were lower among women who developed fractures at 60 years and older, with the lowest risk among those with fractures at 80+ years. Among women with a trochanteric fracture, the SIRs in all but one age group were below unity, but not significantly different from unity. The number of cases in women who fractured their hip at young ages was small, but the analyses showed little alteration of breast cancer risk.
As shown in Table 3, no clear trend with follow-up was noted. Analyses of the time period during which the hip fractures were diagnosed did not reveal any pattern of risk (data not shown).
In all, 48 cases of endometrial cancer were observed compared with 55 expected, yielding an SIR of 0.87 (CI = 0.54-1.16; Table 4). Neither length of follow-up, nor time period of hip fracture diagnosis appeared to be related to endometrial cancer risk (data not shown). However, the statistical power in these subgroup analyses was limited due to small numbers.
Our study aimed to explore the relation of endogenous sex hormones to breast cancer, using hip fracture as a marker of long-term estrogen deficiency. Our results indicate that women with a hip fracture have a significantly reduced risk of developing breast cancer, although no clearcut relation was seen with age or duration of follow-up. Also, women with a hip fracture had a lowered risk of endometrial cancer, although this reduction was not statistically significant. These data tend to support the hypothesis that long-term estrogen deficiency as represented by hip fractures lowers the risk of breast cancer as well as endometrial cancer.
The validity of our data warrants consideration. The use of the Inpatient Registry permitted complete ascertainment of a population-based cohort of virtually all women who had a hip fracture diagnosed during a 19year period over a large geographic region in Sweden. Complete follow-up of breast and endometrial cancer was accomplished through linkage to the national register, so that women who migrated out of the Uppsala region were followed up. In the calculation of expected values, we used incidence rates based on the general population from the same region.
The possibility of surveillance bias is of some concern. A survey in another area of Sweden27found that about 15 percent of the patients with hip fracture become institutionalized in geriatric hospitals and that 10 percent of all patients have impaired mental status prior to the fracture event?8Since the excess mortality among hip fracture patients (up to 20 percent during the first half year29)is determined mainly by concomitant illness and disability prior to the fracture as well as delirium on admission,3~those patients who survived would be selected by having few associated conditions. These observations suggest that the likelihood of a breast cancer being diagnosed may be less among hip fracture patients, compared with other women of similar age in the general population. This would take place when detection of an existing tumor is made chiefly by the patients themselves, since they tend to be less capable of examining themselves than are other women. On the other hand, for those patients cared for in an institution, the chance of detection might be enhanced due to routine medical examinations. Admittedly, it is difficult to estimate to what extent our results are affected by bias, but its impact is likely to be minor as the fraction of long-term survivors after a hip fracture who have an impaired mental capacity is limited.
The hypothesis underlying this study assumes that women who develop a hip fracture have lower bone mass and that osteoporosis is associated with estrogen deficiency. Current knowledge tends to support all three assumptions. Although the etiology of hip fractures is multifactorial, bone loss and fragility (osteoporosis) is an important cause of fractures?9-31The role of estrogen deficiencyin osteoporosis has been suggested by several observations. Extended periods of amenorrhea in fertile women, such as athletes or anorectic women,16 may lead to rapid loss of bone mass and increased risk of fractures, as may cessation of ovarian production of sex steroids through oophorectomy~7or premature or natural menopause.32
Conversely, hormone replacement therapy in the postmenopausal period prevents bone loss3~and osteoporotic fractures.34-4~Endometrial cancer patients, who tend to have high levels of endogenous estrogens, have a lowered risk of hip fractures.19Finally, women with a long-standing, relative estrogen deficiency have a greater risk of developing osteoporosis. Thus, cigarette smoking, lean body mass, and early menopause-established risk factors for osteoporosis~5--are associated with relatively lower plasma levels of sex steroids, notably estrogens.41For these reasons, it seems biologically plausible that women who develop a hip fracture tend to have lower levels of endogenous estrogens or shorter periods of exposure. However, there is some evidence that the relationship between hormone deficiency and fracture risk is strongest for women below 75 years of age at hip fracture diagnosis. In our data, the risk of breast cancer did not seem to show any pattern with age at hip fracture diagnosis.
It is important to determine whether the protective effect of osteoporosis could be confounded by nonendocrine factors. Smoking predisposes to osteoporosis,~5but has not been linked to breast cancer risk. 39 Excessive alcohol consumption, a suspected risk factor for osteoporosis, ~5 has been associated with slightly increased breast-cancer risk. ~If alcohol is a confounder in the present analyses, the reduced risk of breast cancer would be underestimated. Other confounding may exist through various lifestyle factors for which we have been unable to account. However, we judge that most of the characteristics of hip fracture patients-early menopause, slender body build, and amenorrhea~--are more likely to reflect estrogen deficiency, i.e., the exposure under study.
An earlier, registry-based study in Sweden~9evaluated the risk of osteoporosis (i.e., hip fracture) among endometrial cancer patients during follow-up from age 50 years. Endometrial cancer patients were taken as a model to represent prolonged elevated levels of endogenous estrogens. The study supported the hypothesis that estrogens protect against osteoporosis by showing a substantial reduction in the risk of hip fractures, with the strongest protective effect for cervical as compared with trochanteric hip fractures.
Another registry-based study ~8evaluated a cohort of about 9,000 women with breast cancer assembled from the National Cancer Registry of Sweden. These patients were followed up to ascertain risk of hip fractures during a 19-year period, through record-linkage with the Inpatient Registry. Overall, no association was found, in contrast to the reduced risk of breast cancer following hip fracture in the present study. What could explain these apparently discrepant findings? Methodologic problems are unlikely, as similar designs were applied in both studies. Pathologic fractures through skeletal metastases or confounding by various risk factors are also unlikely. Thus, biologic reasons should be considered. While a reduced risk of bone fragility may prevail prior to a diagnosis of breast cancer, the subsequent risk may be increased by the effects of the cancer and its treatment. That is, breast cancer may have metabolic and musculoskeletal consequences42,43 that promote osteoporosis and fractures, including therapeutic oophorectomy performed in some premenopausal women. These complications indicate that the approach of the present study, by evaluating risk of breast cancer among hip fracture patients, might be a more straightforward and valid means of testing the estrogen hypothesis.
The biologic relevance of our approach depends on the timing of the potential estrogenic effects on risk of breast cancer. Since estrogens may influence breast cancer risk by acting during childhood or adolescence,l~it is noteworthy that the estrogen deficiency associated with low bone density may start at an early adolescent period as suggested by the relation of amenorrhea to low peak bone-mass. 16Further, osteoporotic patients would be expected to have comparatively lower estrogen levels through the premenopausal period, judging from the risk factors of early menopause, 32 slender body build, 15 and heavy smoking. 41 Therefore, it seems that osteoporosis can result from an extended estrogen deficiency that may in turn underlie the reduced risk of breast and endometrial cancer. Acknowledgements--This work was supported by the Swedish Cancer Society. The authors thank Dr Matthew Zack for valuable advice, and Mr Eric Berger for computer programming support.
