The aim of this study was to investigate associations between genetic variability in specific Glutathione S-transferases (GST) genes (GSTM1, GSTT1 and GSTP1) and susceptibility to breast cancer. Genotypes of blood specimen DNA were determined for 65 women with incident cases of breast cancer and 108 control subjects. Associations between specific genotypes and the development of breast cancer were examined by the use of logistic regression to calculate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Neither GSTT1 nor GSTM1 homozygous null genotype was associated with a significant increased risk of developing breast cancer. The presence of valine alleles compared to isoleucine alleles in codon 105 in GSTP1 did not increase the risk of breast cancer development. The risk of breast cancer associated with a combined GSTT1 and GSTM1 null genotype was 3.37 (95% CI ¼ 0.76-2.95, p ¼ 0.115). The only significant association between increased risk of breast cancer development and GSTs polymorphsims was found when GSTT1 null, GSTM1 null and the presence of valine in GSTP1 in codon 105 were combined ( p < 0.048, OR ¼ 3.75, 95% CI ¼ 1.01-13.90). Our findings suggest that combined genetic variability in members of the GST gene family may be associated with an increased susceptibility to breast cancer. Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Epidemiological studies have indicated that most cancers are originally caused by environmental exposure. Genetic polymorphisms in enzymes involved in carcinogen metabolism are associated with modest individual risk.1 The carcinogenmetabolizing enzymes are involved in the activation and deactivation of diverse chemical carcinogens, including xenobiotics and sex hormones. The risk to the individual carrying a variant in one of those enzyme genes is estimated to be low, but the frequency in the population of some of the variants makes the potential population interpretation as being of high risk. It has been reported that low activity of N-acetyltransferase genotypes may predispose women to breast cancer induced by smoking.2 Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are a super family of genes and are involved in Phase II metabolism that generally detoxifies carcinogens. GST isoenzymes, particularly GSTM1 and GSTP1, catalyze the conjugation of glutathione to several electrophilic compounds, including polyaromatic compounds. Polyaromatic adducts are lipophilic and can be stored in breast tissue. Furthermore these adducts were found to be higher in women with breast cancer than in healthy control individuals.3,4 GSTT1 can detoxify smaller reactive hydrocarbons.5 In addition, GSTs may have a role in the metabolisms of lipid and DNA products of oxidative stress and also in resistance to cancer chemotherapeutic agents.6,7
To date, four polymorphic families of cytosolicsoluble GSTs (a, m, p and u) of potential interest in this context have been identified in humans.8,9 At least three of the GSTs are represented in both normal and breast tumour tissue.10 The absence of GSTM1 enzyme activity is caused by homozygous deletion (null genotypes) of the GSTM1 gene which is absent in about 45–50% of Caucasian populations. Individuals with no GSTT1 activity, who also have inherited null alleles of the corresponding gene, consist of 10–25% of Caucasian populations.1,8 In GSTP1 variant alleles, a point mutation at nucleotide 313 results in a single amino acid change from isoleucine (Ile) to valine (Val) at codon 105. This residue lies in close proximity to the hydrophobic binding site for electrophilic substrates,11 and the Val105 variant allele has been demonstrated to exhibit altered specific activity and affinity for electrophilic substrates.12
The 65 case subjects were women and diagnosed with breast cancer at the Medical Schools of Mersin University and Kocaeli University. All of the cases had histopathologically confirmed breast cancer. A trained interviewer collected information on demographics, tobacco use, alcohol use and other epidemiological risk factors. An individual who smoked cigarettes of at least 1 cigarette/day was considered a smoker. DNA extraction and genotyping of GSTT1, GSTM1 and GSTP1 Blood was collected in EDTA-containing tubes and DNA was extracted from the lymphocytes by high pure template preparation kit (Roche diagnostics, GmbH, Mannheim, Germany).
The polymorphisms of GSTT1, GSTM1 and GSTP1 were performed by real-time PCR with a LightCycler instrument using hybridization probes in combination with the LightCycler DNA Master Hybridization Probes Kit (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany). The PCR conditions used were essentially those described by Ko et al.13: 4 mmol L 1 MgCl2, 0.2 mmol L 1 of each hybridization probe, 10 pmol of each PCR primers, 2 ml of the LightCycler DNA Master Hybridization Mix and 50 ng of genomic DNA in a final volume of 20 ml. These conditions were the same for the amplification of all three mutations.
The denaturation and annealing cycling programmes for all three mutations were 45 cycles of denaturation (958C, 0 s, ramp rate 208C s 1) and annealing (668C, 10 s, ramp rate 208C s 1). The
extension programme was the same (728C, 19 s, ramp rate 208C s 1) for GSTT1 and GSTM1. The extension programme was 728C, 7 s, ramp rate 208C s 1 for GSTP1. After amplification, a melting curve was generated by holding the reaction at 458C for 10 s and then heating slowly (ramp rate 0.18C s 1) to 958C. The fluorescence signal was plotted against temperature to give melting curves for each sample. Peaks were obtained at 598C for the B-allele and at 638C for the A-allele for GSTP1 genotype. The quantification programme of the LightCycler instrument evaluated the presence of either GSTT1 or GSTM1.
Possible interactions between genotypes and use of estrogens, BMI, history of smoking and family history were examined by using stratified analyses.
The association between the GST genotypes and susceptibility of breast cancer was examined by use of conditional multivariate logistic regression analysis to calculate the odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). The OR was adjusted for potential confounding factors, including age, menarche status, menopause status, parity status, family history of breast cancer and tobacco smoking or adjusted for each of the factors separately. The GST assays place individuals into distinct categories: those with present or null genotypes for GSTM1 and GSTT1. GSTP1 were analyzed as a trichotamous (Ile/Ile, Ile/Val, Val/ Val) or dichotomous (Ile/Ile, Ile/Val þ Val/Val) variable. ORs and 95% CIs were estimated for each of these categories with the present genotype (GSTM1 and GSTT1) or homozygous Ile/Ile (GSTP1) designated as the reference category. The Chi-square method was used to test the frequencies of GSTP1 allele. In this study maximum type I error was set at 0.05.
The association between presumed risk factors and the development of breast cancer is shown in Table 1. Control subjects were younger than cancer patients ( p ¼ 0.01). The majority of study participants were postmenopausal at the time of blood donation. Menopausal status was slightly different between the patients and control subjects ( p ¼ 0.036). Control subjects and cancer patients were closely matched with regard to BMI and smoking status. The degree of use of estrogens (either as oral contraceptives or as hormone replacement therapy) was similar for the patients and control subjects. A family history of OR 95% CI
1 1 (0.36–2.21) breast cancer was associated with a 2.33-fold increase in breast cancer risk.
Breast cancer patients (52.3%) presented a slightly higher prevalence of the GSTM1 null genotype than the normal population individuals (43.5%). However, this difference was not statistically different (OR ¼ 1.62, 95% CI ¼ 0.84–3.10). Similar to the GSTM1 genotype, the presence of GSTT1 null type was not associated with an increased risk for breast cancer. For GSTP1, the homozygous Ile/Ile genotype displayed a similar frequency in the control group and breast cancer patients group. Similarly, heterozygous Ile/Val genotype and homozygous Val/Val genotype were closely matched for breast cancer patients and controls (Table 2).
The frequency of Val-105 allele was 35.6% for controls and 35.8% for cancer patients. There was no difference between the patients and individually matched controls in the frequency of Ile-105 and Val-105 alleles ( p ¼ 0.97; Table 3).
To investigate whether profiles of GST genotypes may be associated with the risk of breast cancer, we examined the risk of breast cancer associated with combinations of genotypes. The reference group consisted of individuals with all three putative low-risk genotypes, that is, the presence of GSTM1 and GSTT1 genotypes and the homozygous Ile/Ile genotype for GSTP1. Individuals heterozygous and homozygous for the Ile-105 Val allele were combined for this analysis. Table 4 displays the risk of breast cancer associated with each combination of genotypes as well as the trend in risk associated with one, two or three putative high-risk genotypes. The presence of at least one putative high-risk genotype was not associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. Although there was a trend to increased breast cancer susceptibility in the absence of both GSTM1 and GSTM1 GSTT1 gene locus by 2.7-fold, this difference was not statistically significant. The combined GSTM1 null, GSTT1 null and GSTP1 105-Val allele genotype possessed an increased risk of developing breast cancer (OR ¼ 3.75, 95% CI ¼ 1.01–13.90). The risk of breast cancer increased by 3.75-fold as the number of putative high-risk genotypes increased.
The glutathione transferases are the family of enzymes involved in the detoxification of a wide range of xenobiotics, including environmental carcinogens, steroids and reactive oxygen species. Inter-individual variations in the metabolisms of carcinogens may occur from various activities of metabolizing enzymes in the liver and target tissues. These variations may result in different susceptibilities to breast cancer development. Increased DNA adducts have been demonstrated in breast cancer tissues of patients with polymorphic GSTM1 and NAT2.4 In this prospective study, we observed a trend to increased breast cancer susceptibility by an increased number of polymorphic GST genotypes. The patients having only one polymorphic gene did not show any significant increased risk for breast cancer development. We did not observe an association between the GSTM1 null or the GSTT1 null genotypes and an increased risk for breast cancer. This supports the findings of Millikan et al.,14 Curran et al.,15 C.B. and GarciaClosas et al.,16 however, in other studies, the null GSTM1 genotype was associated with breast cancer risk.1,17 Helzlsouer et al.1 found a tendency of increased risk of breast cancer among pre-menopausal GSTT1 null women. In contrast, Bailey et al.18 and Millikan et al.14 found no association between the breast cancer risk and the GSTT1 genotype, and Garc´ıa-Closas et al.16 reported a decreased risk for this malignancy for pre-menopausal women lacking the GSTT1 gene.
In the study by Helzlsouer et al.,1 a similar tendency of decreased risk of pre-menopausal breast cancer could be observed for the women with the Val/Val genotype (OR ¼ 0.54; 95% CI ¼ 0.04–6.67). In contrast, in the recent study by Millikan et al.,14 the GSTP1 Ile/Val and Val/Val genotypes also posed a tendency of decreased risk among white women (OR ¼ 0.7; 95% CI ¼ 0.5–1.0; and OR ¼ 0.7; 95% CI ¼ 0.4–1.2, respectively). Gudmundsdottir et al.19 indicate that the val allele of the GSTP1 gene could be associated with increased risk of breast cancer. The homozygous variant genotype (Val/Val) has been seen in other studies to be involved in an increase in susceptibility to other cancer types and the expression of one wild-type (Ile) allele to be protective. Unlike these studies, our results showed no genotype effect with GSTP1 genotype.
On the other hands all three putative high-risk genotypes, null GSTT1, null GSTM1 and GSTP1 105-Val genotypes, were significantly associated with breast cancer development. Helzlsouer et al.1 and Mitrunen et al.9 have also observed an increased risk of breast cancer associated with combined effects of GST genotypes.
The differences in the outcomes of the studies conducted on this topic may be because of differences in the populations studied and in their exposures to the agents relevant to the development of breast cancer. Further studies with larger sample sizes will be necessary to confirm these findings.
