Objective: To explore possible relationships among blood factors, family history of breast cancer (BC) and the risk of the disease, a casecontrol study was carried out in Montevideo, Uruguay. Methods: Eight hundred and one patients were interviewed, including 252 certified cases of BC and 549 frequency-matched controls. Blood groups (ABO, Rh) were obtained from medical records. Multivariate analyses were performed, adjusting for age, selected menstrual and reproductive factors, and family history of BC as well as of other cancers. Results: We found that the absence of Rh factor (Rh ) was positively associated with the risk of BC (adjusted Odds Ratio OR = 1.49, 95% Confidence Interval 95% CI 1.05-2.11). Stratified analyses by family history of BC showed a strong association for Rh with a positive history of first degree relatives (OR = 3.17, 95% CI 1.06-9.47). Also stratified analyses by family history of other cancers showed a positive association for Rh with a positive history of first degree relatives (OR = 2.08, 95% CI 1.05-4.11). Conclusion: Regarding the implications of an inherited factor like Rh and its associations with the family history of BC, it might increase the probability to generate high-risk individuals if further studies confirm the present preliminary findings. # 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
According to international data , Uruguay has a very high incidence of breast cancer (BC) (83.1/100.000) and also high mortality rates (24.1/100.000). Its capital city, Montevideo, has one of the highest incidence rates of the world (114.9/100.000) . Although the country is a developing one, it shares some characteristics with developed regions in which BC is also the most frequent malignant tumor in women (North America, European Union, Australia), e.g. a very high red meat consumption , high literacy and acceptable level of human development (478 in the world ranking) and an aged population, rather similar to developed countries . Several epidemiologic studies have shed light on nutritional risk factors of this population , including anthropometry . Nevertheless, there is a need to continue the research in order to generate new potential high- or low-risk population subsets mainly for preventive purposes.
Studies of associations between tumors and the ABO blood groups have shown increased relative risks for some of them. The A type was more frequent in patients with larynx and hypopharynx , acute myeloblastic leukemia , ovarium , pancreas , breast , vulvar squamous cell cancer associated to non-neoplastic epithelial disorders and gastric cancers . Besides, a positive association with O type was reported on several tumor sites: squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus , gastric cancer , acute lymphoblastic leukemia and skin melanoma . Few differences were communicated on other blood groups: endometrial cancer and advanced stages of esophageal cancer were associated to a higher frequency of AB type, a more frequent B type and less frequent O type in pancreatic cancer , and a high frequency for B blood group in Hodgkin’s lymphomas as well as for cardia cancer .
Also, results were not statistically different compared to control populations for colorectal , brain , salivary glands , cervix uteri , testis , esophagus and skin cancers . Regarding gastric cancer, although an association with blood group O in Iranian people was reported , a modest and non-significant excess associated with blood group A suggests that mechanisms as well genetic implications of the blood group and the risk of gastric cancer are still unknown .
On the other hand, Rh factor and its association with cancer were analyzed in a few studies. A higher frequency of Rh+ was reported for colorectal cancer , also associated with more advanced stages of the disease . Endometrial cancer has been associated with a more frequent Rh factor combined with AB group . A European study reported a higher frequency of Rh in Caucasian patients with lung cancer . Non-significant differences were found for salivary glands and skin cancer .
Almost one half of the cited studies was performed in Asian populations (India, China, Japan, Iran, Lebanon, Armenia) and the other half in European ones (Scandinavian countries, United Kingdom, Spain, Italy, Poland, Turkey); only a few of them were carried out in North America (USA, Canada). Concerning the studied blood factors and their relationship with cancers, since results have involved several forms of association, the analyzed samples were sometimes small, and the differences were not always significant, the evidence can be considered inconclusive.
The presence of a genetic factor in the etiology of familial breast cancer (BC) was supported by the findings of an Icelandic study, where a comparison was done between familial and sporadic BC cases with respect to ABO blood group distribution and the risk of bilateral disease . In that study, where at least one first degree relative had BC, familial cases showed a 2-fold higher prevalence of blood group B and 2.7-fold probability to have bilateral BC than sporadic cases. Regarding ABO groups, a former study focused on the analysis of A type, showing that patients from high-risk pedigrees with inherited forms of BC had no association when compared with control groups .
Evidence of linkage between hereditary BC and the Rh locus was found in 1985 . This study on 17 families with breast and ovarian cancer found evidence suggestive of linkage to the Rh blood group locus on chromosome 1p (short arm). Later, this provided a basis for the findings of Genuardi et al. , who described loss of heterozygosity at the highly polymorphic locus DIZ2 at the chromosome 1p36, more frequent in women with family history of BC than without it. The above mentioned authors suggested that a tumor suppressor gene located on the distal portion of 1p would suffer inactivation as a pathogenic step of ductal BC. Cytogenetic studies indicated that changes like deletions and duplications in chromosome 1 are the most common aberrations in BC , and also that the 1p36.1–36.2 region is a commonly deleted region which generates loss of heterozygosity .
Besides, blood group antigens (A, B, H, Lewis-a and Lewis-b) expressions in BC were examined in relation to estrogen and progesterone hormone receptor status and levels . This study examined blood groups in only 48 cases of BC in Canada, focusing on the loss of expression of the quoted antigens in relation to prognosis. To date, the influence of blood group types on development of BC is unclear.
We are not aware of any previous analytic epidemiologic study on BC reported in the literature in order to analyze blood factors and their possible association with BC. The authors considered that exploratory research on this point was worthy to be carried out, in view of its potential contribution to generate new risk groups, despite the limitations that such analysis within a particular population involves. Taking into account the appropriate conditions for such epidemiologic research that Uruguayan women have and that only descriptive studies have been performed, we decided to carry out the present exploratory analytic study.
The authors carried out a hospital-based case–control study during the period between July/2005 and April/2007, in order to explore environmental and other factors and the risk of BC at two selected medical institutions. On the one hand, the Instituto de Radiolog´ıa y Centro de Lucha Contra el Ca´ncer is a reference center of BC in Uruguay located at the Pereira Rossell Women’s Hospital, and it admits women coming from all the country who belong to the public hospital health system, which covers mainly the lowest socioeconomic strata. The hospital has a catchment of around 120 new BC cases from the 400 who are yearly diagnosed within the public system.
On the other hand, the selected pre-paid medical institution (IMPASA) is representative of mid-to-high classes, who are mainly inhabitants within already recognized high-risk residential neighborhoods in Montevideo . With an annual average of 40 new cases of BC within an affiliated population of 15.000 women, this medical center has an estimated incidence crude rate of 266/ 100.000, which means the double of the national crude rate in Uruguay . These women are exclusively residents in Montevideo.
During the study period we interviewed 818 women up to age 78 as a convenience sample, 255 of them afflicted by a recently diagnosed BC and 563 controls (2 per case), Uruguayan residents and belonging to both healthcare systems. Both medical institutions have their own Unit of Breast Diagnosis, where women have their specialized consultation, by their own will or derived from other physicians. After excluding 17 women (3 cases, response rate 98.8%, and 14 controls, response rate 97.5%) who refused the interview, a final number of 801 women consulting for a mammography at their medical centers were included in the study. Of them, 302 were from the pre-paid system and 499 from the public one. Cases were women who were interviewed the same day or up to 10 days after their initial diagnosis. This time period was a mandatory condition for eligibility of cases, in order to register current anthropometric data which should not be modified by any treatment. Their recruitment was performed in patients with mammogram BI-RADS 4 (suspicious of malignancy) and 5 (highly suspicious of cancer) lesions , and a positive cytological (on site) study, which was further histologically confirmed either at the same institution or in other medical centers subsequently. Initially, no information on cancer staging was collected through the study period. Histology was obtained from 228 cases, from which 203 (89.0%) were ductal carcinomas, 11 (4.8%) lobular carcinomas, and 14 (6.2%) other types. The remaining 24 cases, initially labeled by cytology as ‘‘carcinoma’’, were not possible to be recovered from the institutions where the patients were derived for further treatment.
Unaffected women who were randomly selected as controls had a negative diagnostic mammogram (BIRADS categories 1 completely negative-2 benign findings) performed the same week of the case interview. Benign findings included only benign calcifications and/or axillary lymph nodes considered as without pathologic value. Controls were frequency-matched by age ( 5 years) to cases, being mandatory requirements for the controls not to be hospitalized at the moment of the interview and not being afflicted by a cancer. Most women aged under 30 were only examined with ultrasonography (19 patients, 3.4% of controls), unless findings required also mammography due to the high density of breasts at those ages. Elderaged controls and the corresponding normal mammographies were relatively infrequent to be found at the medical centers, therefore, the ratio controls:cases among them was closer to 1:1. Consequently, we needed to set a limit age of 78 in order to avoid an imbalance in the age distribution.
Although women do not formally participate in screening programs in the selected centers, cancers are usually diagnosed at early stages. Mammographies in the Uruguayan health system are cost-free for women; this fact is supported by law. Since the last decade there has been an intensive educational activity through mass media for preventive purposes, and also adult women can get a periodical control mammography by their own will or by prescription of specialists. This population was taken to conduct the study.
Women were interviewed by only one trained nurse, who was blinded about the objective of the study. All interviews were conducted at a medical office and performed face-toface. A written consent was obtained from every interviewed subject. The study has been carried out with the approval of an ethical committee.
For the interview a questionnaire was used to assess the following sections: 1. Sociodemographic variables. 2. Menstrual and reproductive events (age at menarche, age at first live birth, number of children, months of breastfeeding, age at menopause, menopausal status pre/post, use and duration of oral contraceptives). Menopausal status was defined a priori: if according to the subject (aged 345 years) menstruations have ceased at least for six months having excluded pregnancy, she was classified as postmenopausal. 3. History of cancer in first and second degree relatives. 4. History of hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidemia (cholesterol and triglycerides separately), hyperuricemia, bile lithiasis. Answers were binary (yes/no), independently from being treated or untreated.
In addition, information on blood group (ABO and Rh) was requested from medical records. Concerning the hospital population, since 40% of births in Uruguay take place at the Pereira Rossell Women’s Hospital, this information was available in a large proportion of controls. Concerning the private center population, every woman had her information available at the blood bank database, derived from routine blood typing.
There was no query on hormonal replacement therapy included in the questionnaire, because it is not usually prescribed to postmenopausal women who belong to the public hospital subpopulation. Queries on tobacco or alcohol consumption were not included either in our brief questionnaire. Such information was not available to be analyzed.
Height, waist, hip (measured to the nearest centimeter) and weight (at intervals of 0.100 kg) were also measured at the office. Equipment included a height scale and headboard and a weighing scale. Subjects were weighed wearing minimal clothing. 2.1. Statistical analysis
Crude and adjusted Odds Ratios (OR) and 95% Confidence Intervals (CI) for each variable were calculated by unconditional logistic regression . Potential confounders were included in the multivariate analysis. Equations included terms for age, family history of BC in first degree, family history of other cancers in first degree, difference between age at menarche and age at first live birth, months of breastfeeding and blood type, that have been found as significantly associated in the univariate analysis, and which potentially could affect the studies association. We ran likelihood-ratio tests to analyze the interaction between Rh factor and each of the selected variables. All the calculations were performed with the software STATA (Release 6. Stata, College Station, Texas, 1999).
Table 1 displays the general features of the study sample. Sociodemographic variables were very similar; nevertheless, age groups displayed a significant trend, despite the global p-value of 0.35 (not shown). Menstrual and reproductive variables tended to be similar, except for the difference between age at menarche and age at first live birth, as well as for number of months of breastfeeding. Also, significant differences in family history of BC and history of all cancers in first degree were found. Blood types lacked of trend, but had significant differences of distribution (global p-value = 0.03, results not shown). The B group displayed less cases than the expected. Besides, Rh factor showed marginal differences ( p = 0.08).
The ORs of BC for family history of the disease stratified by blood types are shown in Table 2. Although a positive association was found for groups A, AB and O, only the latter was significantly associated (OR = 1.98, p = 0.03). According to the distribution of cases and controls belonging to B type, which was presented in Table 1, a negative association would be expected for it.
Table 3 shows the ORs of BC for family history of the disease stratified by Rh factor. A positive association was found among Rh women when compared to Rh+ (OR = 3.11, p = 0.001 vs. OR = 1.46, p = 0.15, respectively). This association was significant only among the older fraction of Rh women (OR = 4.88, p = 0.01). Younger ages were positively associated with the risk of BC only among Rh+, but the association was not significant (OR = 1.91, p = 0.12).
The adjusted ORs of BC for Rh factor according to different regression models are displayed in Table 4. Although the inclusion of family history of cancers did not increase substantially the estimations (OR = 1.41, p = 0.044), the adjusted ones showed a modest improvement (OR = 1.49, p = 0.027) when compared to the crude OR (1.35, p = 0.077). Also results of the likelihood-ratio tests which were ran to test the interaction between Rh factor and FH, family history of first degree relatives. p-Values with continuity correction. 100 100 the selected variables, none of them significant, are presented.
Table 5 shows the risk estimations for Rh according to strata of family history of BC and other cancers in first degree. When these variables were positively present, the OR for a Rh factor was significant and higher than in their absence. In the case of a positive family history of BC compared to no family history, the ORs were 3.17 vs. 1.34 respectively, and with a positive family history of other cancers the ORs were 2.08 vs. 1.31 respectively.
Our study found a significant and adjusted OR = 1.49 for BC in women having a negative Rh factor compared to those with the positive factor. When study population was stratified by family history of BC in first degree relatives the adjusted OR was much higher with a positive history (OR = 3.17) than with no history (OR = 1.34). Also, stratification by history of other cancers in first degree showed an increase of risk for Rh when family history was present compared with an absent one (OR = 2.08 vs. 1.31 respectively). Furthermore, the OR of family history of BC in first degree relatives was significantly increased only among Rh women of ages 50 and over (OR = 4.88, p = 0.01). Taking into account the different frequencies of first degree relatives with BC between the control group (10%) and the cases group (16%), it is of interest to remark the differences concerning Rh+ and Rh factor and the mean number of relatives: whereas among controls was 0.10 in both situations, among cases was 0.15 and 0.25, respectively (results not shown). In other words, Rh factor concentrated the occurrence of BC cases in different analyses. Besides, although the crude OR of Rh factor was close to significance (OR = 1.35, p = 0.077), we think that a small increase in the sample size will bring statistical support to the finding.
It is well known that genetic factors (e.g. BRCA1, BRCA2, p53 genes) are involved in the etiology of at least some cases of familial BC . In our study, results suggest that a gene associated with blood Rh factor could increase susceptibility to mammary carcinoma among women with a positive history of BC in first degree relatives. A genetic linkage cannot be inferred by our results, since it requires other research methods like family/pedigree studies. Nevertheless, the fact that both the Rh factor genes and the BRCD2 suppressor gene (ductal BC, also known as BCDS2, gene ID:7797) – which has not been still completely studied – share their loci within the short arm of chromosome 1 (1p36), one close to the other seems provocative.
Concerning ABO blood group genes, they are mapped at chromosome 9q, in which the genetic alteration is common in many cancers . Therefore, ABO blood group antigen expression may be affected by the genetic change of tumors . On the other hand, it is possible that our observed associations are not due to the blood group antigens themselves, but to the effects of genes closely associated with them. Furthermore, it might have nothing to do with molecular mechanisms or genetics. To our knowledge, this is the first analytic epidemiologic study on the Rh blood group and risk of BC. Nevertheless, the associations herewith reported between BC risk and Rh factor, statistically significant after adjustment for various risk factors including family history of BC in first degree relatives, require confirmation in other studies.
According to specialized literature , the prevalence of Rh factor in the general population is between 3% and 40%, with an average of 16% for people with European ancestry. While African and Asian descendents display the lowest frequencies (around 3–10%), Caucasians reach the highest ones. In the studied sample, 23.9% of controls and 29.8% of BC cases were Rh , displaying differences with a p-value near significance (0.08). A review on the admixtures of Latin American populations reported between 65% and 90% of European genetic contribution in the Uruguayan population, which could partially explain the high frequencies of Rh subjects found in our study. Our analyses reported higher ORs among women aged > 50, different from known etiologic genetic risk factors like BRCA1 or BRCA2, which tend to be associated with earlier age at diagnosis. Nevertheless, susceptibility genes do not need to follow such trend and Rh factor cannot be discarded to belong to this category.
As other case–control studies, limitations and strengths should be recognized. The sample size is a major limitation, since it determines the statistical power to detect certain results, particularly in some small subsets. In addition, we were not able to perform a population stratification; therefore the chance of a bias regarding ethnic differences between cases and controls cannot be precluded. Since the present study was not originally intended to be related to genetic epidemiology but mainly to environmental factors, this limitation is recognized by the authors, taking into account the trihybrid populational pattern comprised of Amerindian, Black-African and European origin the Uruguayan population has, according to the above mentioned study .
Information concerning Rh derived from routine blood typing, hence, there is a limitation about quantitative data of the D antigen, since more refined and accurate tests were not available for our exploratory study. The same considerations as above, about the objectives of the case–control study should be made.
On the other hand, both cases and controls belong to a relatively homogeneous base population: they were matched by age, they also proceeded from the same healthcare systems having a ratio cases:controls of about 1:2 at both institutions, and sociodemographic variables were mostly similar. To be quoted also among the strengths, mostly women with normal breasts according to mammography – not only cancer-free women – were selected as controls, in order to reduce the possibility of biasing results due to any association of benign breast diseases with the analyzed medical items. Finally, a high participation (response rate > 98%) was achieved; we think that a selection bias due to the procedure would be rather unlikely. Albeit it is not possible to avoid completely any bias, we think that results were not chance findings. Caution is needed in interpreting the results since the population features limit their generalization.
Interestingly, very close to the Rhesus system D polypeptide (Rh factor) gene are located the Endothelin converting enzyme 1 gene (implicated in the regulation and adaptation of arterial stiffness, which is related to essential hypertension) and the Gallbladder disease 2 gene (related to gallbladder pathology) , even closer than the already quoted BRCD2 suppressor gene . Associations among BC, Rh factor, hypertension, and gallbladder disease cannot be ruled out, taking into account that their common area within the locus 1p36 suffers several types of alterations. In particular, according to a recent review, current research has determined that endothelin plays a major role in the growth and progression of malignant tumors and its receptors are considered pivotal in the progression of BC and the invasion of BC tumor cells . These issues deserve further research, from our viewpoint.
In conclusion, the results of our preliminary study showed that an association between Rh factor and BC risk, statistically significant after adjustment for various risk factors including family history of BC in first degree relatives, was found. Our study is on-going and new analyses to a larger sample, the study of blood factors in first degree relatives afflicted with cancer as well as analyses of other women of different origins are needed to confirm the suggested trends.
The authors declared that there are no potential conflicts of interest, neither financial nor of other nature, to disclose.
