A case-control study was conducted among Singapore Chinese women, comprised of 200 histologically confirmed cases of breast cancer and 420 hospital controls. Subjects were interviewed on family history of breast cancer, social and demographic characteristics, reproductive history, and diet one year prior to interview. Differences in risk factors were observed according to menopausal status. In the premenopausal group, the most consistently significant nondietary effect was an increased risk with late age at first birth. In postmenopausal women, the most consistent nondietary effects were increased risks with nulliparity, tall stature, high educational status, and a family history of breast cancer. In premenopausal women, the strongest dietary effects were low risks with high intakes of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), ~-carotene, soya protein as a proportion of all protein, and a high risk with high red-meat intake. No dietary effects were observed in postmenopausal women. Examination of effects by 10-year age groups suggested that the differences in the effects of age at first birth, nulliparity, height, education, 3-carotene intake, and PUFA intake between premenopausal and postmenopausal w o m e n were at least partly attributable to age-related differences in the baseline distributions of these variables. The variation in the effects of red meat and soya protein appeared to be attributable mainly to menopausal status itself, which is consistent with the hypothesis that these factors operate on risk by way of hormonal mechanisms. I n t r o d u c t i o n Diet has been regarded for some time as a promising area of research in breast cancer epidemiology.15 Results from studies addressing fat, in particular, vary,2,3,6although a recent meta-analysis yields significantly increased risks with high intakes of total fat and saturated fat. 7 Results with respect to monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA) vary considerably.6,8,9The
results of some recent studies include a protective effect of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) and a predisposing effect of meat or animal protein, s-l°The latter results suggest the possibility that meat or another correlated factor is responsible for observed effects of fat and saturated fatty acids (SFA).
Other dietary effects which have been observed include protective effects of high intakes of 3-carotene, vitamin C, and fiber.4,8'9The effects of B-carotene and vitamin C are observed also in the meta-analysis of Howe et al. 7 High alcohol intakes have been observed to increase risk, although the absolute size of the effect is not consistent among studies. I~
A case-control study9 of breast cancer carried out recently among Singapore Chinese has reported on dietary results. A particularly striking finding was that while increased risks were associated clearly with high intake of red meat and low intake of I~-carotene, soya protein, and PUFA in premenopausal women, no significant dietary effects on breast cancer risk were observed in postmenopausal women.
Breast cancer incidence has been increasing rapidly in Singapore in the last two decades/2 There is evidence of a cohort effect, i.e., women born since 1945 having particularly high rates. 13 The high-risk cohorts have lower birth rates in early adulthood, which may partially explain the effect.'~Also, there was a considerable increase in availability of animal products in Singapore between 1961 and 1983, and there is evidence that changes in individual intake have been more marked among younger people. '4,~s Further, variability in intake has been observed to be higher in younger women.9, is
There are three main purposes of this paper. First, we examine the (previously unpublished) results of the case-control study with respect to reproductive and other nondietary factors specific to menopausal status. Second, we consider the dietary results in the context of the nondietary findings. Finally, we examine variation in dietary and nondietary risk factors between premenopausal and postmenopausal women. We assess whether differences by menopausal status may be attributed to different hormonal environments in which the dietary risk factors act, or to an age effect-which might reflect the demographic differences between younger and older women with respect to dietary and other lifestyle factors. We did not attempt to investigate the possibility of different etiology of premenopausal and postmenopausal breast cancer in general (a hypothesis for which the design and size of this study would not be adequate). If the effect of a risk factor appears to vary with age rather than menopausal status, the variation is likely to be due to demographic factors and recent dramatic socioeconomic changes peculiar to this population? TM If its effect changes acutely with menopausal status, there is at least a strong possibility that the interaction is genuinely physiological and that it may be worthwhile to seek plausible mechanisms and to attempt to validate the result in future studies.
While the dietary effects on risk, in this study, were
CancerCausesand Control. Vol 3.1992 confined to premenopausal women,' De Waard's observation of a higher risk with obesity would lead one to expect dietary effects to be stronger in postmenopausal women. 16Many previous studies either have found dietary effects to be stronger in postmenopausal women6-8or observed no difference in dietary effects by menopausal status.3,17In view of the a priori uncertainty about the variation by menopausal status, the strategy was to observe the empirical results first and consider the social and biologic possibilities thereafter, giving careful consideration to population-specific hypotheses.
Materials and methods The case-control study was comprised of 200 histologically confirmed, consecutive breast-cancer cases at Singapore General Hospital and the National University Hospital, and 420 hospital controls chosen to approximate the same age distribution as the cases within each of the two hospitals. The age distributions of cases and controls are given in Table 1. Further details of recruitment are given elsewhere.'
Dietary intake was assessed by interview, using a quantitative food-frequency questionnaire; food intakes were converted to nutrients as previously described.',18Alcohol intake was not measured, as few Chinese women in the age groups under consideration were expected to drink at all, and there was no way of ensuring frank answers from those who did. In a previous case-control study of colorectal cancer in Singapore, 18 meaningful analysis of alcohol consumption had to be restricted to males since only five percent of female cases and six percent of female controls reported ever drinking at all.
The interview also included questions about marital status, age at menarche, number of livebirths, number of pregnancies carried to at least 24 weeks, age at first birth, breast-feeding history, oral contraceptive use, and age at menopause for postmenopausal w o m e n (postmenopausal being defined as having had a complete cessation of menses for at least one year). Subjects also were questioned about occupation, education, Chinese dialect group, smoking, weight, and height.
Data were analyzed by multiple logistic regression, producing odds ratio (OR) estimates of relative risk (RR) and deviance chi-square significance tests, adjusted for concomitant variables where necessary." A l t h o u g h age was partly controlled for in design, it was adjusted in statistical analysis in order to allow for any residual effect.
R e s u l t s NS NS Continued... 1.0 1.7 1.1
NS NS NS NS NS 0.03 0.05 N o other significant effects were observed in premenopausal women.
In the postmenopausal group, significantly higher risks were observed in association with high occupational and educational status, and body height above 1.57 meters. A decreased risk in association with a history of breast-feeding was observed. The absence of a breast-feeding effect in premenopausal women may be due to the fact that a history of breast-feeding was much rarer among premenopausal women.
After adjustment for age at first birth, all other factors lost their significance in the premenopausal group. When the significant variables in Table 3 were assessed simultaneously in a multivariate model, the factors which retained their significant effects were educational status, nulliparity, height, and family history of breast cancer (positive history in mother, sister, or maternal aunt). Accordingly, dietary factors were assessed by adjusting for the respective factors within each menopausal group. To avoid losing the nulliparous women from dietary assessment in the premenopausal group, nulliparity was included as a category in age at first birth.
For purposes of statistical analysis, risk was assessed by tertiles of the control range. Table 4 shows the distributions of premenopausal cases and controls by nutrient and food intakes, with results of logistic regression analysis adjusted for age and age at first birth. Significant increases in risk were associated with high intake of animal protein as a proportion of total protein and red meat (mostly pork in this population). Significant reductions in risk were associated with high intakes of PUFA, 3-carotene, soya protein, total soya products, soya protein as a proportion of total protein, and PUFA relative to SFA. The corresponding results for postmenopausal women--adjusted for age, height, nulliparity, education, and family history of breast cancer--are shown in Table 5. N o significant effects were observed. In a multivariate model, adjusting for other significant dietary factors in premenopausal women, the effects which retained their statistical significance were those of red meat, f3-carotene, PUFA, and the proportion of protein from soya sources?
The most consistently significant nondietary fact o r s - a g e at first birth, nulliparity, height, education, and family history of breast cancermthen were stratified by age group instead of menopausal status. Table 6 shows the results with respect to these variables within 10-year age groups, and results of significance tests for heterogeneity by menopausal status and age group. The variation in effect on risk of age at first birth was not significant by age group or menopausal status, although the effect appears to be weaker in older age groups. N o heterogeneity of the effect of body height NS NS Animal protein (g) < 22.0 22.0-32.4
32.5+ Continued...
Continued... was observed, and the effect of family history was ascertainable only in women under 60. The effect of nulliparity varied by both menopausal status and age group. The adjusted tests for heterogeneity and the reversal of the direction of the effect of nulliparity in women under 40 indicated that the variation was represented best as heterogeneity by age group. There was significant heterogeneity by age group and by menopausal group of the education effect, although which group best represented the variation was not clear.
The corresponding results for the four most significant dietary variables--red meat, f3-carotene, PUFA, and the proportion of total protein from soya sources--are shown in Table 7. For 3-carotene and PUFA, the effect on risk appears to change with age group rather than menopausal status, and the directions of the effects are reversed in women over 70. The O R of 21.67 associated with the highest third of P U F A in the oldest group is based on five cases and only one control, and the CI is from two to 220. The effect of red meat seems to change specifically with menopausal status rather than age group. The soya protein effect clearly varies with menopausal status, residual variation by age being negligible.
Consideration of interactions in a case-control study of modest size must include acknowledgement of lack of power giving rise to false negative results, and the play of chance to false positives, particularly where many factors are being studied. The results on interactions are useful therefore in deciding with what hypotheses the present results are most consistent; they are not suitable for generalized detailed inference about the nature of differing etiologies for premenopausal and postmenopausal breast cancer.
Initial analysis of reproductive and social factors by menopausal status suggested differences in risk factors relevant to the two menopausal groups, but further examination of the most predictive of these yielded a different picture. N o strong evidence for a difference in effects of age at first birth, or family history of breast cancer was apparent. For the latter factor, there is clearly insufficient data among older women to come to any conclusion about heterogeneity by age or menopausal status. In the case of age at first birth, it is likely that the observed difference between the premenopausal and postmenopausal groups was due to the smaller variation of this variable in older women. It should be noted that there are considerable differences by age in reproductive history in this population." This also has implications for interpretation of the nuUiparity effect.
The effect of nulliparity did vary significantly with age in addition to variation associated with menopausal status. In particular, a very high RR was associated with nulliparity in older women and a decrease in risk in younger women. If real, the latter effect may well be due to a temporary increase in risk immediately after a pregnancy2° The former is likely to be partly attributable to the fact that older women who were parous had quantitatively higher average parity than younger parous women. Other workers have found a similar heterogeneity of the effect of parity by age in particular.2'a2It does seem, however, that in the postmenopausal group the quantitative effect of parity does not explain any more variation in risk than does the parous/nulliparous dichotomy. Considering both these findings and those in different populations, it is likely that part of the variation in the effect of nulliparity is attributable to a qualitative change related to the menopause, and part to demographic changes in reproductive habits particular to the Singapore female population.
The effect of education varied substantially by both age group and menopausal status, but there is no unambiguous evidence implicating one factor or the other. Clearly, the difference in baseline distribution of educational status (see Tables 2 and 3, and note the absence of any women with higher education in age group 70 or over), which is likely to account for some of the observed heterogeneity, is age-related. It should be remembered, however, that we are almost certainly observing the reflected effect of an unobserved correlate of educational status.
There was weak evidence of a different pattern of risk associated with body height in different age groups. That there was an increased risk associated with greater body height is not unprecedented,23 although the opposite also has been observed.24
For the four dietary variables considered--red meat, 3-carotene, PUFA, and proportion of soya protein-the findings are arguably less ambiguous. (Incidentally, although total energy was not recorded in this study, it should be noted that the main dietary effectswere similar when adjusted for a surrogate score for total energy, made up from total protein and fat intake, and the incomplete carbohydrate sources considered.) Although there is always the possibility that the negative results in the postmenopausal women are due to poorer reporting in this group, or to diet one-year-ago being a poorer surrogate for long-term diet in this group, other researchers have not found an absence of dietary effects in postmenopausal women6-8 and it is worth considering alternative explanations for the variation in effects between premenopausal and postmenopausal women.
The variation in the effect of red meat intake is more consistent with a change associated with menopausal status than with age, the effect being largely absent from the postmenopausal group. Table 8 shows the means, standard deviations, and absolute ranges by age, of the four variables in controls. For red meat, the major change is an abrupt decline in intake and variability in the oldest women. Thus, there does seem to be reasonable representation of high and low levels of intake in postmenopausal women. It may be profitable in other studies to assess the hypothesis that there is a variation in effect with menopausal status, due to hormonal mechanisms, if plausible mechanisms of this kind can be postulated. An alternative explanation is that while the underlying effect might be age-related, there is more power to detect heterogeneity between two groups than among five. One hypothesis of agerelated effect is that high meat intake at young ages is associated with risk (e.g., via increased mitotic activity), but it has no effect at later ages, the observed suggestive effect at ages 70 years or more arising from a correlation with general overnutrition or obesity.
For 3-carotene and PUFA, age appears more important in terms of variation of the effects on risk. Again, this is not consistent with much previous research/,s,17 but the present result can be explained partly by differences in intake. Table 8 shows that both average intake and variability of intake decline steadily with age, which could explain w h y the protective effects are stronger in younger women. The reversal of the direction of the effects in older women is more difficult to explain. The increases in risk with high intake of J3-carotene and P U F A in older women lose their significance when adjusted for nulliparity, education, and height--three of the four strongest factors in postmenopausal women (it being impossible to adjust for family history in this age group due to empty categories). Also, there are very low variances of these variables in women aged 70 years or more (Table 8). It may be that the unadjusted high risks are due to chance, but it is also possible that they are reflections of a predisposing effect of overnutrition in previous years. The last explanation is consistent with the fact that the observed effects are considerably attenuated when adjusted for height and education (with the latter considered as a surrogate for socioeconomic status).
The heterogeneity of the soya protein effect is clearly more consistent with variation by menopausal status than by age. We previously suggested that the effect of soya protein intake was due to the high content of plant estrogens in soya products. 9;sa6It has been argued since that the mechanism of the effect may lie in the phytate content of soya beans, and its impact on iron metabolism.27The apparent sharp change in effect about the time of the menopause tends to favor the theory that the underlying mechanism of this effect is the hormonal effect of relatively high intake of plant estrogens.
Partly because of the uncertainty conferred by small numbers in subcategories, it is not possible to be conclusive about effects specific to age group or menopausal status. In particular, results with respect to dietary variables specific to menopausal status vary considerably between studies.4,sThe following tentative interpretations are suggested by this study: (i) the most consistently significant nondietary effects were increased risks associated with late age at first birth in premenopausal women and with nulliparity, tall stature, high educational status, and family history of breast cancer in postmenopausal women; (ii) the observed attenuation of the effect of age at first birth in postmenopausal women and of the effects of nulliparity and education in premenopausal women are likely to be due largely to differences in the age-specific distributions of these variables in the population studied; (iii) the most consistently significant dietary effects were an increased risk associated with high redmeat intake, and decreased risks associated with high intake of 3-carotene, PUFA, and soya protein as a proportion of total protein, all in premenopausal women only; (iv) the absence of the effects of P U F A and 13-carotene in postmenopausal women probably arises from lower intake and lower variation of intake at older ages in this population; and (v) the variation of the effect of soya protein appears to be associated more strongly with menopausal status than with age, suggesting that the effect of this variable is hormonal.
Acknowledgements--The authors thank field investigators S. H. Low and A. Chew for their painstaking work. We also thank the Departments of Surgery, Orthopaedic Surgery and Ophthalmology of Singapore General Hospital and the National University Hospital for allowing us access to their patients.
