RISK FACTORS FOR SCREEN-DETECTED BREAST CANCER
A case-control study HEIKKIJOENSUUJ,UHANITUOMINENS,ANNAHINKKAP,EKKAKLEMI,SAKARTIOIKKANEN,
OSMORASANENand ILMO PARVINEN
Risk factors for breast cancer (BC)detected in mammography screening were sought using a questionnaire among 31 927 women aged from 40 to 74 years who attended screening. Data from 204 women with screen-detected BC were compared with those of 612 controls who did not have BC in screening, Mothers of women with BC had more often BC than those of the controls (8% vs. 3%, odds ratio, OR, 3.18,95% CI 1.59-6.35). Women with screen-detected BC were older at their first.childbirth (25.7 years vs. 24.7 years, OR 1.61, 1.14-2.33), and younger at menarche (13.6 years vs. 13.8 years, OR 1.38,l.OO-1.91), but there was no significant differencein the body mass index, number of pregnancies, breast size, smoking, or in the use of contraceptivepills between the cases and the controls. In multivariate logistic regression analyses, late age at the first childbirth, BC in the mother, and early age at menarche were independent risk factors for screen-detected BC but they appear to be of limited value in targeting screening in the female population aged from 40 to 74 in order to improve its cost-effectiveness.
Reported risk factors for breast cancer include early age at menarche, late age at natural menopause, few or no childbirths, late age at first childbirth, tall body stature and postmenopausal overweight, family history of breast cancer, high socio-ecnomic status, high consumption of alcohol, and history of breast cancer in one breast ( ).
Possible factors include menopausal hormone therapy, use of oral contraceptives, high fat intake, and a large breast size ( I , 4, 5). In the present study we investigated risk factors for breast cancer among women who had breast cancer detected in a mammography-based screening program.
Received 8 April 1992.
Accepted 13 August 1992.
From the Department of Oncology and Radiotherapy ( H . Joensuu) and Department of Pathology (P. Klemi, S. Toikkanen), Turku University Central Hospital; Department of Biostatistics, University of Turku (J. Tuominen, S. Hinkka); Cancer Society of South-West Finland (0.Rasanen); and Health Center of Turku (1. Parvinen). Turku, Finland.
Correspondence to: D r Heikki Joensuu, Department of Oncology and Radiotherapy, Turku University Central Hospital, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, SF-20520 Turku, Finland.
Cases. A mammography screening program for all women aged from 40 to 74 years was started in the city of Turku, South-Western Finland, in 1987. The female population of the city is about 86000. From 1987 to 1990, 32 557 women had 60 050 bilateral mammograms taken with 2 projections. The mammograms were reviewed independently by 2 radiologist. The great majority (87.5%) of the invited women attended screening. Two hundred and four breast cancers were detected at screening in 19871990. Of these, 18 (9%0)were in situ cancers, 140 (69%) invasive cancers smaller then 2cm in diameter (TI), 34 (17%) 2.1-5.0 cm in diameter (T2), 5 (2%) larger than 5.0 cm, and in 7 (3%) cases the primary tumour size was unknown. Data were collected by means of a questionnaire that was answered by the woman herself when she attended mammography screening. ,
Conrrols. For each case with screen-detected cancer 3 controls were sought among the women who attended screening in the same city, but were not diagnosed to have breast cancer. The controls were matched for age and the year of screening, matching was done at random with a computer program ( ). The mean age of the cases was 59.5 years (SD, 9.8 years, n = 204), and that of the controls also 59.5 years (SD, 9.8 years, n=612). There was no difference between the cases and the controls in the frequency of mammography examinations performed, frequency of self examination of the breasts, or gynecological or breast surgery (Table 1).
Statistical analysis. The frequency tables were analyzed with the chi-squared test. Non-normal distributions were compared with Mann-Whitney’s U-test. Multivariate logistic regression analyses were used to study the adjusted effects between different risk factors ( ). Adjusted and unadjusted odds ratios (ORs) with their 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) were calculated to assess the associations between the groups and different variable. Statistical analyses were done with the BMDP computer program (BMDP Statistical Software, Department of Biomathematics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA).
Mothers of 17 women with screen-detected breast cancer had been diagnosed with breast cancer, which frequency was clearly higher than that among the controls (8% vs. 3%, OR 3.18, 95% CI 1.59-6.35, Table 2). The mean age at menarche was 13.6 years among the cases, which was less than the mean age of 13.8 years found among the controls ( p = 0.03, Table 3). Age at the first childbirth was higher (25.7 years) among the cases than among the controls (24.7 years, p = 0.03). There was no significant difference between the groups in the body height, weight, the body Risk factors for screen-detected breast cancer, continuous variables mass index, number of pregnancies, age at menopause, or the breast size measured with the bra cup size. However, women with a large breast size tended to have a greater risk for breast cancer than those with small breasts (Table 2). Similarly, no significant difference could be found in smoking habits, the use of contraceptive pills, or estrogen and/or progesterone replacement therapy.
In order to study the adjusted effects of single risk factors for screen-detected breast cancer, the frequency of breast cancer in the mother, age at menarche, age at the time of the first childbirth, and the number of pregnancies were entered into a multivariate logistic regression analysis using the cutoff values shown in Table 4. Age at the first childbirth (adjusted OR 1.64, 95% CI 1.14-2.38) followed by history of breast cancer in the mother (OR 3.06, 1.36-6.85), and age at menarche (OR 1.66, 1.08-2.54) turned out to be independent risk factors for screendetected breast cancer. When the same analysis was performed among post menopausal women only, the results Adjusted and unadjusted o d d ratios and their 95% confidence intervalsfor 4 risk factors I Number of cases with information available. * The median value was used as the cut-off value.
N.S.,not significant Adjusted odds ratio (95% CI) 3.06 (1.36-6.85) 1.64 (1.14-2.38) 1.66 (1.08-2.54) N.S.' remained essentially similar with the odds ratios for age at the first chilbirth, history of breast cancer in the mother and age at menarche being 1.58 (1.04-2.41), 2.42 (0.926.33), and 1.95 (1.20-3.15), respectively.
History of breast cancer in the mother, age at menarche, and age at the first childbirth turned out to be independent risk factors for breast cancer found in mammography screening in the present study. This is in accordance with earlier findings in clinical breast cancer ( ). The risk factors for screen-detected and clinical breast cancer are likely to be similar, although there is some evidence that screen-detected breast cancer is less often of the ductal histological subtype, more often better differentiated, has higher estrogen and progesterone receptor contents ( ) and lower S-phase fractions (-10) than breast cancer first suspected by the woman herself.
The odds ratios for the risk factors found were small, less than two, except for the presence of maternal breast cancer. The mean age at menarche among the women with screen-detected cancer was 13.6 years and that for the controls 13.8 years, and age at the first childbrith was 25.7 years vs. 24.7 years, respectively. These differences, although statistically significant, are so small that it is difficult to exploit them in practice in order t o target breast cancer screening t o risk groups formed by these factors. Similarly, the number of pregnancies is probably of little value in the respect. Women with breast cancer present in their mother's history are a risk group, but the size of this group was small, only 8% among the women with screendetected cancer, and 3% among the controls. It appears that targeting breast cancer screening with the risk factors investigated is not feasible ( ).
More optimistic views on the possibility t o target screening to some extent by the use of risk factor combinations have been expressed by some authors ( ). These models have included breast symptoms, age at screening or both as variables, which may improve the model efficiency to find out groups with increased risk for breast cancer. However, women with breast symptoms need careful evaluation for the presence of breast cancer irrespective of screening programs, and the purpose of screening is t o find out undiagnosed and still unsymptomatic cancer within the female population, and usually within a selected age range.
No evidence that the use of contraceptive pills or hormonal treatment for menopausal symptoms is a risk factor for breast cancer was obtained, but this result is based on fairly small numbers and lack of detailed data. The lack of association is in line with several other reports, although data at variance with this have also been published (1).
In summary, history of breast cancer in the mother, age at the time of menarche, and age at the first childbirth could be shown to be risk factors for breast cancer detected in mammography screening. However, the odds ratios for all of these factors were fairly small, and targeting breast cancer screening with these factors will result in missing many of the cancers detected in screening of the entire female population.
