In a French case-control study of 1010 women with breast cancer and 1950 controls with nonmalignant disease, the variations of the effects of 8 risk factors for breast cancer as a function of age at diagnosis, were analysed by tests of homogeneity and trend. The risks associated with a late age at first full-term pregnancy and with nulliparity were different between age-groups (test of homogeneity: p = 0.03) and the highest risks for these two factors were observed in women 45-54 years old. The risks associated with Quetelet index were also found to vary with age at diagnosis (test for trend: p = 0.008). A high Quetelet index decreased the risk of breast cancer in the younger age-groups; this decrease of risk became progressively less important with advancing age, and no such effect was found in the oldest age-group. Inverse results were observed for a tall stature (test for trend: p = 0.04): a tall stature increased the risk of breast cancer in the younger age-groups, and the figures suggested a reverse effect in the oldest group. No large variation with age was found for the effects of age at menarche, history of breast cancer death in mother or sisters, prior biopsy for benign breast disease, and weight. In conclusion, the relative importance of certain risk factors for breast cancer is closely related to age at diagnosis. Nulliparity and a late age at first birth appear to be major risk factors only for middle-aged women, whereas a low Quetelet index and a tall stature appear to increase- the risk of breast cancer only for younger women.
RISK
AGE CHRISTINE BOUCHARDY,‘.* MONIQUE G. LB’? and CATHERINE HILL’
Breast cancer
INTRODUCTION
In several developed countries, breast cancer incidence increases faster with age before age 50 than after l. It has been suggested that the etiology of this cancer might be different according to age at diagnosis; genetic factors and reproductive history playing a larger role in the risk of breast cancer at a younger age, and environmental factors at an older age 2,3.
To verify this hypothesis, casecontrol studies have analysed the risk factors for breast cancer either by menopausal status & 17, or by age at diagnosis 18-221. Most of the factors studied are suspected to be acting through endocrinian mechanisms l, 231, but the latter have not been identified clearly.
Because of the possible long latency for breast cancer, many cancers diagnosed in postmenopausal women had already begun before menopause. Moreover, at the time of menopause, the ovarian activity does not stop abruptly but diminishes gradually, starting before, and continuing after a woman’s last menses. Thus, if ovarian activity is to be studied et al. as a potential risk factor for breast cancer, the study of two groups only, premenopausal and postmenopausal (or younger and older), might not be adequate for etiological research. The study of risk factors within several age-groups should provide more information and enable hormonal interpretations. As far as we know, only Lubin et al. 21 have studied the effects of the main risk factors according to age, considering 4 age-groups in a study of 577 breast cancer patients and 826 controls. Using data from a casecontrol study of 1010 breast cancer cases and 1950 controls, we have analysed the variation with age, of the effects of 8 breast cancer risk factors, and we report here the results of this study.
MATERIALS
AND METHODS
The information was collected between October 1976 and May 1980 in 66 private surgical clinics 24. All the clinics entered into the study between 1976 and 1978, and the average duration of participation was 2.5 years. Cases were all patients with histologically confirmed primary breast cancer, diagnosed less than 1 year before the interview, coming into the clinics for initial surgical treatment or for postoperative follow-up. Controls were patients coming for surgery for a nonmalignant disease, excluding only benign breast disease. Cases and controls were matched on age at interview (within 5 years) and on clinic. When several controls were eligible for one case, the controls with the date of entry into the clinic closest to the case were chosen. When no control patient could be found, staff members, or subjects coming for check-up, were recruited as controls.
A questionnaire was filled out by each subject including the main risk factors for breast cancer: age at menarche, number of children, age at first full-term pregnancy, menopausal status, etc. To obtain information on family history of breast cancer, patients were asked for the causes of death of parents or siblings only. This was to avoid the expression “breast cancer”, the diagnosis of breast cancer being sometimes unknown to French patients. The total history of body weight variation was asked for, including usual, maximal and minimal weights, age at maximal and minimal weights, duration of current weight and weight gained at menopause.
To fill out the questionnaire, patients could ask for help from clinicians, nurses, or family members. Thus, 30% of cases and 35% of controls were helped by clinicians or nurses. After completion of the questionnaire, the surgeon added the diagnosis of current disease and the type of surgery. No cases and controls were reported to refuse the questionnaire. The age at diagnosis was not recorded, but all the interviews were held less than 1 year after the diagnosis and age at interview was considered as equivalent to age at diagnosis.
Age was studied in 4 groups: under 45,45-54, 55-64, and 65 years or more. When the case and control ages differed, the age was defined as the age of the case.
Risk factors for breast cancer were categorized in two groups: classical risk factors and morphological characteristics. Classical risk factors were age at menarche, number of children, age at first full-term pregnancy, prior biopsy for benign breast disease, and history of breast cancer death of mother or sisters. Patients who had used oral contraceptives, or estrogen replacement therapy were concentrated in only one age-group, namely the former in the under 45 age-group and the latter in the 45-54 agegroup. Thus, variations by age of risks associated with these factors could not be studied.
Morphological characteristics were weight, height, and Quetelet’s index (QI), defined as weight at interview divided by squared height, in kg/m*. Only results with current weight are reported here because analyses on other measures of weight gave similar results.
Validation of the data was realized using the PIGAS system 25. Matched logistic regression methods 26 were used to compute the risk for each factor, adjusting for menopausal and socioeconomic status. The interaction with age was studied in two steps. In the first step, a test of homogeneity was made to test for the equality of the relative risks estimated in the 4 age-groups. In the second step, a trend test was made to evaluate a potential linear variation of risks with advancing age. Detailed methods for these tests are described by Breslow and Day 26. Score tests were used for testing both homogeneity and linear trend.
RESULTS
The study included 1010 cases and 1950 controls: 940 cases were matched with 2 controls and 70 cases with only 1 control. Diagnoses for the controls are detailed in Table 1. Three per cent of controls turned out to have cancer in a site other than the breast. Although these should have been excluded by the protocol, they were not excluded from the analysis. The mean ages of cases and controls were 58.2 and 58.0 (SD 12.8 and 12.9).
Tables 2 and 3 show, for the total population, the relative risks of breast cancer associated with the 8 factors studied. These risks are given, firstly for a detailed categorization of these factors, and secondly for the summarized categorization which has been used in the analyses according to age at diagnosis. All the factors, except height, were significantly related to the risk of breast cancer.
Table 4 describes the distribution of the main risk factors for breast cancer, both for cases and for their matched controls, by age of the cases.
In each age-group, as for the total sample, the percentage of missing data was less than 2% for 7 factors, whether it be for cases or controls.
The largest percentage of missing data was I-1.6(1.3-2.0) *RR for summarized categories used in Tables 5 and 6.
TReference category. $Reference category including patients with missing data. $NS: p > 0.10.
CI = Confidence intervals. observed for information on breast cancer death of mother or sisters; most arose from women who were adopted children with no known blood relatives, particularly in the oldest agegroups. Patients with missing data have been included in the reference category.
The older control women had had, on average, later menarche, earlier age at first full-term pregnancy, and were of smaller height than the younger controls. This is likely to be related, at least partly, to improvements in the nutrition of the younger generations. (1) Classical factors
Table 5 shows the RR of breast cancer associated with the first 5 factors by age-groups.
The risks, for each factor, were adjusted on menopausal status, socioeconomic status, QI, and all the other factors of the table. To remove the colinearity between the number of children and the age at first birth as categorized, the adjustment on age at first birth was done using only two categories, first birth before age 25 or not, and the adjustment on number of children used a linear coding 0, 1, 2 for 0, l-3, 4+ children respectively.
No significant change with age was found for an early age at menarche, and for a low parity, and the trend tests were not significant. The risk associated with age at first birth and with nulliparity varied with each age-group. The highest risks associated with a late age at first birth and with nulliparity were observed for the group of women aged 45-54 (RR = 2.0 and RR = 2.5 respectively). Nulliparity was not a risk factor for breast cancer for women before age 45 (RR = 0.8, as compared to women who had had their first child before age 25). No significant difference was observed between the risks related to a prior biopsy for benign breast disease, and to a history of breast cancer death in the family, for the 4 age-groups. However, the percentages of patients with these factors were small, as shown in Table 4. (2) Morphological characteristics
Table 6 shows the RR of breast cancer associated with morphological factors by agegroups. The risks, for each factor, were adjusted on menopausal status, socioeconomic status, and all the factors in Table 5. For weight and height, the RR were also adjusted on each other.
The risks of breast cancer related to height varied significantly with age (trend test, p = 0.04): before 65 years, women with a height of 156 cm or more had a higher risk of breast cancer than smaller women, whereas after 65, a reverse effect of height was suggested for women with a height of 166 cm or more. The risks of breast cancer related to QI also varied significantly with age (trend test, p = 0.008): women with a high QI had a lower risk of breast cancer in the younger age-groups. This decrease of risk became progressively less important with age, and no clear effect of QI was found in the oldest age-group. Similar variations were observed for weight, but the test for trend was not significant. (3) Assessment of potential biases
To verify whether our results could be explained by the specificity of our data set, additional analyses were performed. Firstly, we studied the effect of the help of clinicians or nurses to fill out the questionnaire. Results were not modified when analyses were restricted to women who had filled out the questionnaire alone. Secondly, in order to validate the inclusion of patients with missing data in the reference categories, the analysis was done by excluding these patients from the study; no modifications were observed in the estimated relative risks by age-group, nor in the p-values of tests. Thirdly, to evaluate the possible biases related to the diseases of the controls, we *Adjusted on menopausal status, socioeconomic status, Quetelet index and all other factors in the table (see text for adjustment on number of children and age at first birth). tReference category. $NS: p > 0.10. n = Number of cases; number of controls is given in Table 4. studied the variations of weight and QI in the control patients by broad category of diseases.
No large differences were shown between these different categories when the effect of age was controlled for. For instance, weight and QI were similar, on average, between the group of controls with cardiovascular disease or cholelithiasis (potentially related to nutritional factors), and the group of controls with other diseases (62.6 kg, SD = 10.5 vs 62.6 kg, SD = 11.2; and 24.3 kg/m2, SD = 3.9 vs 24.3 kg/m2, SD = 4.1 respectively). Also, the exclusion from the analysis of the controls with cholelithiasis and cardiovascular disease, and/or with malignant disease, did not modify the risks associated with weight and QI. Finally, similar results were observed when usual weight, or minimal and maximal weight were studied.
DISCUSSION
The variations of the effects of 8 risk factors for breast cancer, as a function of age at diagnosis, were studied in a case-control study of 1010 cases and 1950 controls. Among classical factors, the risks associated with late age at first full-term pregnancy and nulliparity were significantly different between each age-group, the highest risks being observed in women 45-54 years old. Among morphological factors, the risks associated with height decreased significantly, and those associated with QI increased significantly with advancing age. (I) Classical factors
No significant interaction between age at menarche and age at diagnosis was found in this study. Three studies 7, 14,211 have reported a larger effect of an early menarche in older women, but most other studies 4, 11, 12, 191did not observe this result. It could be argued that there is a progressively greater inaccuracy of recall of the data with advancing age, but some authors have shown that this factor was reasonably accurate even at older ages 27. An early age at menarche is a recognized risk factor of breast cancer, but no definitive conclusion can yet be drawn on the variation of the effect of this factor with age.
For other reproductive factors, our data provide two pieces of evidences. First, we found that nulliparity was not a risk factor for breast cancer in women before age 44. Secondly, the highest risks associated with nulliparity and with a late age at first full-term pregnancy were observed in women aged 45-54. There is some evidence that each full-term pregnancy is followed by a transient increase in the risk of breast cancer lasting 5-10 years 28. This increase after a full-term pregnancy was also predicted in a statistical model proposed by Pike et al. 29: at a younger age, the model predicts that nulliparous women will have a lower risk of breast cancer than parous women, and at middle age, the highest predicted risks are associated with a late age at first full term pregnancy and with nulliparity. Lubin et al. 21 who considered 4 age-groups, also found that the highest risk associated with nulliparity was observed for women aged 45-54 (RR = 3.1 for nulliparous women compared to parous women with 4 children or more). Wynder et al. 6 showed that the highest risk associated with a late age at first full-term pregnancy was observed in perimenopausal women. These findings are in agreement with our results. Of course, this could not have been observed in studies which examined the risks in only two groups of women 8,9, 12, 14, 15, 181.
No significant difference was observed between the risks associated with a history of breast cancer death for the 4 age-groups. However, only family breast cancer mortality was recorded, and not morbidity. Therefore, the number of patients with family history of breast cancer is underestimated in our study. Another problem is the high percentage of missing data.
For these reasons, our results have to be interpreted with caution. Some studies have shown a greater risk associated with family history of breast cancer in premenopausal women than for postmenopausal women 6, 12,181, but others, like our study, have failed to demonstrate this fact 7, 14, 19,211. In most studies, a large proportion of missing data was also observed.
There is still speculation about whether this increased familial risk is the result of genetic or of environmental factors shared by the family  11.
The main results of our study are the different effects of height and QI in the different agegroups. Tall women had a higher risk of breast cancer than small women in young age-groups, whereas an inverse effect was observed in the oldest age-group. Heavy women had a lower risk than thin women in young age-groups, whereas in the oldest group, no effect was demonstrated.
For height, it is not likely that our results can be explained by the choice of controls, since height does not vary after age 25. Few studies have considered the effect of height separately by age at diagnosis or by menopausal status.
Our results are in agreement with four studies 8, 13,30,3 11,but not with two others 6,7. The manner in which height might influence the risk of breast cancer is still unknown. Height is influenced by genetic, nutritional and hormonal factors 23, 321, but other studies are needed to understand underlying mechanisms.
For weight and QI, it could be argued that our results are explained by the selection of our controls, because at least 28% of them had diseases which could be related to overweight, such as cholelithiasis and cardiovascular disorders (Table 1). However, all additional analyses performed to control this possible bi as failed to document this hypothesis. One could also imagine that a lower weight might be the consequence, rather than the cause, of the breast cancer. However, most cases were admitted in the participating centers for surgery, which implies that they did not have advanced breast cancer. Moreover, similar relationships between QI and risk of breast cancer were observed when using QI computed from the usual weight, the minimal or the maximal weight reported by the women.
Many studies 7,8, 10, 11, 16,331 have reported a positive association between obesity and risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal or older women, but an approximately equal number of studies 46, 14, 17, 301 have failed to observe this association. Numerous other studies 7, 8, 10, 11, 14,22, 301, found a negative association between obesity and risk of breast cancer in young or premenopausal women, but this fact has been underemphasized. Our study does not support the hypothesis that a higher QI increases the risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women, but suggests that a higher QI decreases this risk in premenopausal women.
Numerous hormonal hypotheses have been proposed to explain the positive relationship between weight or QI and the risk of breast cancer 23. However, no hypothesis to explain the negative relationship observed in premenopausal women has been proposed. Indeed, if a positive relationship between obesity and estrogen production has been found in postmenopausal women l, no relationship was observed in young women 34. It can be argued that in thin women, mammary tumors are detected earlier than in other women. In a prospective cohort study 30, tumors among lean women were found to be smaller than those found among heavier women. This suggests that the excess risk of breast cancer among lean premenopausal women might be, in part, an artefact of easier and earlier diagnosis of mammary tumors among such women. But this fact probably does not entirely explain the increased risk.
The variations of risks of breast cancer associated with obesity and height according to age are the principal observations which suggest that etiology might differ between breast cancer occuring at early and later age. This does not exclude the unifying concept of the etiology of breast cancer recently proposed by de Waard 23, in which, in both periods of life, the nutritional factors exert their effect through endocrine mechanisms where estrogen plays a major part. Biological studies taking into account the evolution of hormonal levels, diet, weight and height through different ages of life are still needed to obtain a better knowledge of these phenomena.
Acknowledgements-This study was supported in part by the Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale (Contract 78-5-113-8). It was made possible by the voluntary support of members of the “Groupe d’Etude Epidtmiologique sur le Cancer du Sein” who were responsible for the local organization of the investigation. We would like to thank the reviewers for their constructive comments. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17.
