A n n e t t e P e r n i l l e H o y e r a n d G e r d a E n g h o l m The association between s e r u m lipids and breast cancer risk was investigated in a c o h o r t of 5,207 Danish women, w h o participated in The Glostrup Population Studies between 1964 and 1986. D u r i n g four to 26 years of follow-up, 51 incident cases of breast cancer were identified by linkage to the Danish Cancer Registry. At the time of lipid measurement, the w o m e n were between 30 and 80 years of age. A n inverse association was f o u n d between serum high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and risk of breast cancer, which was n o t changed by a d j u s t m e n t for potential confounders such as social class, age at menarche and menopause, n u m ber of full-term pregnancies, body mass index, or alcohol and coffee consumption. The relative risk was 0.3 (95 percent confidence interval -- 0.1-0.8) for w o m e n in the highest quartile of serum HDL-cholesterol compared with w o m e n in the lowest quartile and the relation displayed a significant negative trend (P = 0.01). For serum triglycerides there was a suggestion of a positive association with breast cancer incidence, b u t the trend was n o t significant (P = 0.06). N o relationship between total s e r u m cholesterol or low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and risk of breast cancer was observed. Risk estimates for well k n o w n breast cancer risk factors such as social class, age at menopause, n u m b e r of full-term pregnancies, and obesity were in the directions expected. I n t r o d u c t i o n
Dietary fat has long been suspected of playing a role in the etiology of breast cancer although the matter is still controversial. ~Serum lipid levels are found to be correlated with dietary fat intake. 2-4 Thus, it has been hypothesized that serum lipid levels might predict risk of breast cancer.
Most cohort studies have assessed breast cancer risk only in relation to total serum cholesterol and no consistent association has been reported, s-s Only two cohort studies have examined a possible association between breast cancer risk and J3-1ipoprotein cholesterol, which is a rough measure for low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-cholesterol) and no relation was observed. 9,1째 N o cohort studies, to our knowledge, have evaluated high-density lipoprotein cholesterol's (HDL-cholesterol) influence on breast cancer risk. The importance of this subdivision of total serum cholesterol is well documented in other fields,u Some of the cohort studies have included serum triglycerides in their evaluation.9,12-14These studies, which are inconsistent, have not taken into account other potential risk factors or have not obtained serum values of triglycerides under fasting conditions.
We were able to evaluate whether fasting serum lipids including HDL-cholesterol have any influence on breast cancer risk in a cohort of 5,207 Danish women.
Study population The Glostrup Population Studies15 were established primarily to study risk factors for cardiovascular diseases and have been, since 1982, a part of the W H O Multicentre Investigations Monitoring Trends and Determinants in Cardiovascular Diseases (MONICA). 1~Different investigations, however, have served other scientific purposes. Between 1964 and 1986, six investigations consisting of subjects sampled at random from exact age groups (30-, 40-, 50-, 60-, and 80year-old males and females) have been included in the studies.
The study area is situated southwest of Copenhagen, and is comprised of 11 homogeneous suburban municipalities around The County Hospital in Glostrup, with a background population of 300,000 inhabitants. Participants in The Glostrup Population Studies are representative of urban and suburban Danes with respect to social class, housing, education, occupational conditions, and job categories.17,18
Study subjects consisted of all women examined in The Glostrup Population Studies from 30 to 80 years of age ( ). The participation rates for the different cohorts varied between 68.0 percent and 88.8 percent, with an overall participation rate of 78.5 percent. Table I summarizes details of the investigations and Figure 1 shows, in a Lexis' diagram,19the time each birth-cohort entered the study and the time followed for breast cancer, Standardized questionnaires have been used in all cohorts, recording the following baseline variables: demographic variables, smoking habits, coffee and alcohol consumption, age at menopause, and number of full-term pregnancies. Other reproductive characteristics such as age at menarche were elucidated only in some of the investigations.
Measurements of weight and height, and blood samples were obtained in connection with a clinicial examination. Blood samples were drawn after 12 hours' fasting. A comprehensive description of the methods employed has been published earlier?째Before 1982, a chemical method was employed in the determination of total serum cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, and triglycerides; after 1982, an enzymatic method was Birth year 1914 i go 80 70. oo. 60~ 40" 3O CI = 95 percent confidence interval.
1904 u i u u u u i , u u u i u~ i , i 1N9 '11174 1979 ~ 1084 1 11)80 used. Differences between the two methods have resulted in incomparability between measurements of serum triglycerides and serum HDL-cholesterol before and after 1982, but did not influence the comparability of total serum cholesterol. To account for the former, lipid data were categorized before and after Cases of breast cancer occurring after entrance into the study until end of follow-up (31 December 1989) were identified by linkage to the Danish Cancer Registry, which has registered all cases of cancer in the entire Danish population since 1943, and which is regarded as virtually complete?2 This procedure has been used in several other cohort studies.23-26
In Denmark, vital status for every inhabitant is registered in the Central Population Registry (CPR). Vital status at 31 December 1989 was determined by computerized linkage to CPR using the unique 10-digit personal identification number (ID-number) which, since 1968, has been issued to all persons living in and entering Denmark (by birth and immigration). IDnumbers on women who entered the study in 1964 (born in 1914) was identified through a follow-up examination of this cohort in 1981.
A total of 51 breast cancer cases were available for analysis of total serum cholesterol and serum triglycerides. Serum measurements of HDL-cholesterol were not obtained on women born in 1914 and 1936 (entrance 1976), which restricted the number of cases for analysis on HDL-cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol to 31.
Person-years at risk were calculated from time of each woman's entrance into the study to diagnosis of breast cancer, death, emigration, or end of follow-up (31 December 1989), whichever occurred first. The expected number of breast cancer cases was estimated for all exposure categories by multiplying personyears at risk with age- and time-specific rates from the Danish population.
The multivariate analyses were based on multiplicative relative risk (RR) models with external ratesY The general model used is:
ln(h,,(xj,...,xk)) = ln(hj,) + Ix + Xkbkxk where at (xl.... ,xk) is the incidence rate for the study cohort with age a and period t and with variables Xl,..., xk measured at entrance into the study, h,', is the incidence rate for the Danish population, Ix represents In, the standardized incidence ratio (SIR) of the baseline exposure category in the study cohort in relation to the Danish population, y and bk are the parameters. The parameter bk can be interpreted as the log relative risk of exposure category k compared with the cohort baseline.
The models were fitted using the Genstat statistical package,28where the effect of the variables was tested using likelihood ratio methods. The 95 percent confidence intervals (CI) were calculated by using the approximate normality of the distribution of the estimated parameters in the models.
The number of breast cancers observed was not significantly different from the expected, SIR=0.9 (CI = 0.7-1.2). Table 2 shows the RR associated with various breast cancer risk factors. Decreasing risks were observed with low social class, increasing number of full-term pregnancies, and with menopause before 50 years of age, while the risk increased with increasing coffee consumption, body weight and body mass index (BMI), the latter trend being significant. N o clear relationship appeared with age at menarche, height, alcohol consumption, or smoking.
Due to the change in analytic methods, the relation between breast cancer risk and HDL-cholesterol, LDLcholesterol, and triglycerides was first examined before and after 1982, respectively. There was an overall inverse relation between HDL-cholesterol and breast cancer incidence. Tests for trend were of borderline significance for measurements before as well as after 1982. In the combined analysis, risk of breast cancer also decreased with increasing levels of HDL-cholesterol and the trend was highly significant (Table 3).
There was a positive relationship between LDLcholesterol and breast cancer risk, but the trend was neither significant before and after 1982, nor in the combined analysis (Table 3).
For serum triglycerides taken before 1982, there was an elevated risk for breast cancer in the upper quartile, but no clear trend was displayed. After 1982, the breast cancer risk increased with increasing level of serum triglycerides. Combined, the trend was strengthened and of borderline significance (Table 3).
There was no relationship between total serum cholesterol and breast cancer risk (Table 3).
Adjustment for menopause (less than 50 years or 50 or more years), age at menarche, number of full-term 1.0 1.0 0.7 0.8 1.0 0.6 1.0 0.7 0.9 0.8 T a b l e 2. B r e a s t c a n c e r risk b y selected variables pregnancies, BMI, alcohol and coffee consumption did not change the estimated RRs either in the analysis of serum lipids before and after 1982 or both periods combined. P > 0.20 P > 0.20
The most interesting findings of our study are the inverse relationship between HDL-cholesterol and breast cancer risk, and the suggestion of a positive association between serum triglycerides and breast cancer risk. The latter is not in agreement with other cohort studies,9,12,14of which most found no relation between serum triglycerides and breast cancer risk. However, these studies can be criticized either for being too small (less than 30 cases included) 12,~or not taking into account variables such as weight, BMI, age at menarche, age at menopause, number of full-term pregnancies, alcohol and coffee consumption, '2-x4and being influenced b y nondifferential misclassification due to blood samples for analyzing triglycerides being taken under nonfasting conditions?,"
The lack of association between total serum cholesterol and breast cancer risk in the present study is in accordance with most other cohort studies, 7-9,~2 although positive5,14as well as inverse6a3 associations have been reported.
The relation between LDL-cholesterol and breast cancer risk has been elucidated in other studies b y measurements of 13-1ipoprotein cholesterol which, as mentioned, is a rough measure of LDL-cholesterol?,l째 In this study, serum values of LDL-cholesterol were calculated b y Friedewald's formula 21which provides a reasonable approximation, unless the level of triglycerides in serum is higher than 4.6 mmol/1. N o n e of the participants had serum triglycerides over this level. lund, Dr E. Henriksen, Mr L-E. Kofoed, and Ms K. However, as observed in previous studies9,1째no overall Boll for technical support. association between LDL-cholesterol and breast cancer risk could be demonstrated.
It seems unlikely that the observed associations between serum lipids and risk of breast cancer could be attributed to the effect of a preclinical cancer, because only three cases of breast cancer appeared during the first two years of follow-up. Since this study was based on a random sample of w o m e n which were identified before the breast cancer cases were diagnosed, the possibility of selection bias seems minimal.
The relation between serum lipids and breast-cancer risk factors is complex. Obesity, a well-established risk factor for breast cancer in postmenopausal women, is the most common cause of hypertriglyceridemia and often is followed by elevated levels of total serum cholesterol.29-3~ Alcohol consumption, also k n o w n to increase breast cancer risk, might increase the serum concentration of triglycerides?2 Elevated measurements of total serum cholesterol have been observed among persons with heavy coffee consumption? 3-3s
The observed decrease in serum HDL-cholesterol with increasing sexual maturation, after pregnancies and in connection with natural menopause, indicates that female sex hormones (endogenous estrogens) influence the lipid metabolism?6-38These factors were treated as potential confounders in this study, but no confounding effect was detected. The small number of cases did not allow separate analysis on cases occurring before and after menopause, as might be desirable since ovarian activity (endogenous estrogens) is regarded as an important determinant of breast cancer.
Even though this study included more cases than most of the previous studies,s,6,7,~2,14it still has a limited statistical power, which makes firm conclusions difficult. O n the other hand, risk estimates found here for some established breast-cancer risk-factors, such as social class, age at menopause, number of full-term pregnancies, and indices of obesity, were in the direction expected.
In summary, the present study suggests that high levels of HDL-cholesterol and low levels of triglycerides are associated with a decreased risk of breast cancer. Further investigations are needed before it can be established if serum lipids have any influence on breast cancer risk and whether it is dependent on menopausal status.
A c k n o w l e d g e m e n t - - T h e authors thank Dr T. Jorgensen of The Glostrup Population Studies, Dr M. Ewertz and Dr H. H. Storm, of The Danish Cancer Registry, for their scientific assistance, as well as Ms I. Bj~rn
