First pregnancies are known to have higher oestrogen levels than later ones and first-born women are at increased breast cancer risk compared with later-born women. We hypothesized that a birth order effect might be even more evident in male breast cancer patients, in whom oestrogens in adult life are generally low. In a populationbased study in Denmark involving 77 male breast cancer patients and 288 population controls, first-born men compared with later-born men had a relative risk of 1.71 for the disease (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.00-2.92). This result is in line with that seen in female breast cancer cases and indicates that male breast cancer may have roots in the intrauterine life, oestrogens being a likely mediator. European Journal of Cancer Prevention 14:185-186 c 2005 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
In 1990, Trichopoulos suggested that adult female breast cancer might be related to high oestrogen exposure in utero. Intrauterine levels of oestrogens have been associated with several perinatal characteristics in normal pregnancies. The strongest evidence for an association of intrauterine oestrogen levels exists with respect to birth order. Studies that have examined this issue have consistently reported higher levels of free oestradiol in first pregnancies than in later ones . Several studies have exploited this association in examining the effects of birth order, as a proxy for oestrogen exposure, on female breast cancer risk in the offspring and they have reported that first-born women tend to be at increased breast cancer risk than later-born women . We predicted that a birth order effect would be even more evident in male patients with breast cancer, because oestrogen levels in adult men are generally lower than those in women.
From the nationwide Danish Cancer Registry, we retrieved all histologically confirmed cases of male breast cancer diagnosed during the period 1968–1995 and born after 1919. By linkage to the Central Population Registry, we obtained the place of birth for all male breast cancer cases; all 150 patients born in the northern and central part of Jutland or on Zealand were included. Data on birth order and birth weight were extracted from midwife
The results are shown in Table 1. There was no or a weak association between birth weight and male breast cancer risk. In contrast, the risk of male breast cancer was 70% higher among first-born compared with later-born and the increase is borderline statistically significant.
The importance of an association between birth order and male breast cancer risk stems from the fact that among the postnatal characteristics that can plausibly differ between first-born and later-born people, none can be thought of as a risk factor for male breast cancer strong enough to generate a confounded relative risk of 1.71. aAdjusted for current age and marital status of the mother, as well as mutually for the variables in the table. Neither is bias a likely explanation given the complete coverage of two major geographical areas in the Danish Cancer Registry and the careful matching for reporting midwife. Chance is always a possible, but still highly unlikely, explanation. The weight of evidence points to the prenatal environment associated with birth order being an important predictor of breast cancer risk among men. In support of this conclusion is the fact that a similar, though weaker, association has been reported for breast cancer among women. Hsieh and colleagues found significantly higher risk of premenopausal breast cancer among first-born women in a case–control study of breast cancer that included women from Boston, USA, Glamorgan, Wales and Tokyo, Japan; among postmenopausal women, the association was similar in direction, but statistically not significant . In a very large study, Titus-Ernstoff and colleagues found a significant inverse association between birth order and breast cancer risk among postmenopausal women (TitusErnstoff et al., 2002). In a small hospital-based case– control study in Greece, an excess risk of male breast cancer was found among first-born in comparison to laterborn patients .
Although the documented birth order association points to intrauterine components in the origin of male breast cancer, it is not necessarily true that pregnancy oestrogens are responsible for the association. Bernstein and colleagues reported that the percentage and the amount of free oestradiol (E2) are significantly higher in the early part of a woman’s first pregnancy than at a comparable time-point in her second pregnancy . later reported similar results, although their study focused on total, rather than bioavailable, oestradiol and on the late, rather than the early, stage of pregnancy. Similar results have been reported from other studies that have examined this topic . However, birth order patterns may exist for other hormones and it is only because oestrogens in adult life are intimately linked to breast cancer that the index of suspicion is higher for pregnancy oestrogens than other pregnancy hormones.
Indeed, the apparently sharper birth order risk gradient in male breast cancer in comparison to female breast cancer may be due to the limited role oestrogens may play in adult life for breast cancer occurrence among men.
The study was supported by the Oncologic Research Unit, Aalborg Hospital and by research grant 9510030 from the Danish Cancer Society.
