The role of the consumption of fat, animal protein and vitamins on breast-cancer risk was investigated in a hospitalbased case-control study of 924 patients (409 cases and 515 controls) in Montpellier (France). A dietary history questionnaire, administered by interview, comprising 55 key food items as well as beverage consumption, and including food frequenciesand portion sizes, was used to measure the intake of total fat and i t s constituents, animal protein. retinol, p-urotene, vitamin E and alcohol consumption. The questionnaire also elicited information on relevant medical history and personal characteristics. All food items which showed significantly elevated odds ratio (high-fat cheese, desserts and chocolate and processed pork meat) in a multivariate analysis contained a high proportion of animal fat. This is reflected in the nutrient analysis, which showed a significant linear trend as well as an elevated odds ratio for the highest tertile of consumption of total fat OR, = I.6 (I. l-2.2), animal fat OR, = 1.6 (1.1-2.211, saturated fat OR, = 1.9 (1.32.6) and mono-unsaturated fat OR, I.7 (I.2-2.511. For post-menopausalwomen, there is a particularly strong association with saturatedfat OR, = 3.3 (I.C7.8) in a multivariate analysis including all other significant nutrients. There is no evidence of an increase of risk with the intake of animal protein and no evidence of risk reduction with increasedconsumption of vegetables, p-caroteneor vitamin E. Along with some recent studies, our results give support to the hypothesis that dietary fat is a risk factor in breast carcinogenesis.
The association of dietary factors and breast cancer (BC) has been widely discussed during the past decade. Most of the interest has centered around the role played by fat, animal protein and alcohol intake.
Although most international or national correlation studies reviewed by Goodwin and Boyd (1987), as well as a study by Rose et al. (1986) suggest a positive association between total fat or saturated fat intake and BC mortality or incidence rates, epidemiological studies have given inconsistent results . A report discussing the latest epidemiological studies showed, in a combined analysis of 12 case-control studies from several countries, a significant association between saturated fat and post-menopausal BC. In addition, Van? Veer et al. ( 1 9 % ~ )found a significant positive association with total fat intake.
In some case-control studies, the risk of BC was also positively associated with the intake of protein-rich foods and more specifically animal protein . Three prospective studies examined also the relationship with meat intake and the 2 Japanese studies showed a positive association.
Recently the risk of BC has been inversely associated with fiber intake or vegetable consumption , or p-carotene . One study (Graham et a l . , 1982) found an inverse association with retinol in older women, while others did not .
The case-control study reported here was designed to study specifically the role of dietary fat, animal protein, vitamin intake and alcohol on BC in an area of Europe where there is a large variability of diet due to the existence of both a rural population with traditional dietary habits and an urbanized population. A subset of the patients involved in this study has undergone a thorough biological investigation which was also used for validation of the nutritional questionnaire . Results regarding alcohol intake have already been reported and here we present results regarding both specific food items and nutrients. Alcohol being a dietary component which was shown to be positively associated with BC in our study, it will be specifically taken into account in our analysis.
Patients were interviewed between February 1983 and April 1987. Cases were women aged between 28 and 66 with histologically confirmed primary carcinoma of the breast who were hospitalized in a cancer institute (Paul Lamarque Center, Montpellier) and had not previously undergone any therapy. Controls in the same age group were all the women admitted for the first time to 3 wards: neurological, neurosurgical in a nearby hospital or hospitalized for general surgery in a large clinic. All these women came for a first diagnosis and hence were not currently being treated for chronic diseases. These wards were chosen at first because the pathologies which they treat are, on the whole, not related to nutritional factors. We excluded from the controls only women admitted to these 2 wards for neoplastic or cardiovascular diseases. The cardiovascular diseases were excluded from the hospital wards because in neurology about half of the patients are admitted following ischemic accidents, hence not excluding them would lead to over-representation of this pathology which is related to diet. For the clinic which treats a variety of diseases, the only exclusions were neoplastic diseases.
The Paul Lamarque Center is the main cancer treatment center in the area and is attended by patients, irrespective of social class, largely from the Languedoc-Roussillon region. For other diseases, patients can choose to be treated either in a hospital or in a private clinic approved by their health insurance plan. For this reason, we chose as control wards 2 hospital wards (neurology and neurosurgery) and a private clinic carrying out general surgery. Before the start of the study, a check was made that the wards from which the cases and controls were recruited had patients of similar age and from the same geographical area of residence. In our sample the proportions of cases and controls from rural and urban areas are similar (rural: 19% of cases vs. 22% of controls, small towns: 48% vs. 41%, large cities: 33% vs. 29%, x: = 2.25 NS).
Each week, a co-ordinator visited the wards and selected for interview all women satisfying the inclusion criteria of the study on the new admission list. Periodically, the age distributions for cases and controls were compared and, if necessary, the recruitment of controls in particular age groups was stopped for a while. The interviews were carried out by trained medical staff, who questioned cases and controls. The interviews, presented as an inquiry on living conditions and health, lasted between 30 and 40 min. Medical and reproductive history was recorded, as well as general information regarding socio-economic status.
Part of the questionnaire was of dietary history type (Block, 1982). It started by a recall of the usual structure of the meals and then the dietary interview covered 55 key food items in lipid, animal protein, retinol, p-carotene and vitamin E consumption. For each item, a unit quantity was specified (weight, spoon, etc.) and each subject told the interviewer her daily, weekly or monthly frequency of consumption of the item. In this questionnaire, the grouping of food items was similar to that originally designed by the Nutrition Unit of the French National Institute for Health and Medical Research (Pkquignot and Cubeau, 1973). The overall duration of the nutritional habits described in the questionnaire was also requested. If the subjects’ eating habits had changed over the last 12 months, they were asked to refer to their former diet. The weekly vitamin, animal protein and lipid consumption was evaluated from these data by means of nutritional tables . Seasonal consumption was taken into account by multiplying by the proportion of months where the specific food item was usually consumed. When data were missing on some food items for a patient, the nutrient consumption related to this food item could not be evaluated. This explains the slight reduction of the sample size occurring when nutrient consumption is analyzed. Questions concerning alcoholic beverages (wine, beer, fortified wines and spirits) were included among questions concerning consumption of non-alcoholic beverages in order t o minimize underdeclaration (Tuyns et a l . , 1975). It was decided to evaluate the total alcohol consumption per week by summing the number of glasses of the different types of alcoholic beverage consumed .
The dietary questionnaire was centered on key items for lipid, animal protein and some vitamin consumption and did not include information on carbohydrates. Consequently a total caloric intake could not be evaluated.
Analyses of variance and co-variance for testing the null hypothesis concerning the difference between the mean value of the weekly consumption of food items of cases and controls was carried out after logarithmic transformation of the data and using the GLIM procedure of SAS. This transformation was adopted because the distribution of values recorded in the original scales of measurements was widely dispersed and skewed. Table I1 gives simple data description in the original scale of measurements, while p values refer to the analysis carried out after logarithmic transformation and adjustment on age and menopausal status.
For each food item or nutrient, classes corresponding as closely as possible to tertiles of the control distribution were chosen. The ORs corresponding to the second and third tertile will be referred to as OR, and OR,. For some food items (olive oil and nuts), the first class corresponds to no consumption and the next 2 classes are separated by the median of the controls; for margarine consumption, only 2 classes (yesho) were considered. If interactions were suspected x2 tests for homogeneity were calculated following Breslow and Day (1980).
Both univariate and multivariate analyses were systematically carried out, but we report here only the results from the multivariate analysis using logistic regressions performed with ). To compute adjusted ORs, each food or nutrient was included in turn in a model including all the adjustment variables as a categorical variable with 3 independent levels and 95% CI were derived from the standard error of the corresponding regression coefficient. The x 2 value of the test for linear trend after adjustment was computed as the difference between the deviance of the model without and with the variable of interest coded as a single variable taking values 1 , 2 or 3.
To measure the independent effect of each nutrient, a multivariate stepwise logistic regression including all the different nutrients was carried out. In view of the existing correlations between intake of several nutrients, the stability of the results was checked by computing both ascending and descending stepwise procedures. For this multivariate nutrient analysis, the sample size consisted of 379 cases and 474 controls for whom there were no missing nutrient values. As already stated, total caloric intake could not be calculated in our study and hence the difference between overall caloric effect and the effect of individual nutrients could not be tested by the methods discussed in Howe (1989).
RESULTS
Altogether 932 interviews were completed during the study period. All cases replied and 8 controls refused to answer. The analysis presented thus comprises 409 cases and 5 15 controls. The number of controls is larger than the number of cases because during the defined study period all cases and all controls satisfying the inclusion criteria in the 3 wards were interviewed.
The control group was composed of 156 women (30%)admitted for neurosurgery (mostly sciatic neuritis, more seldom, traumatism or benign tumors), 41 women (8%) admitted for abdominal surgery (gynecological or digestive), 97 women (19%)admitted for neurological conditions (mainly peripheral paresis and paresthesia, epilepsy), 61 women (12%)admitted for neurological diseases (multiple sclerosis and Parkinson’s disease), 71 women (14%)with slight psychological disorders, 63 women (12%)admitted for headaches, asthenia and sleep disorders, 15 women (3%) admitted for cardiovascular diseases. For 1 1 women (2%),the diagnoses were unknown.
The mean age of cases and controls was 52.4 and 50.4 years respectively standard deviation (SD) 8 . 6 and 9.41. Nutritional habits were long standing, averaging declared 26.9 years for cases and 24.4 years for controls SD 12.2 and 12.5 respectively.
To assess comparability with previous studies, the odds ratios relating to generally recognized determinants of breast cancer are given in Table I after adjustment on age and menopausal status (except for age at menopause). They are in general agreement with those found in Sattin et al. (1985). There is a statistically significant elevated risk for a family history of breast cancer (mother or sister), a past history of benign breast disease, late menopause and higher education level. There is a borderline significant protective effect for late age at menarche. The risk associated with late pregnancy does not reach statistical significance.
When pre- (N = 348) and post-menopausal (N = 575) women were considered separately, the risks relating to late age at first pregnancy become significant among premenopausal women (OR, = 1.95 1.1-3.61 and OR, = 2.05 0 . 9 4 . 8  respectively, x 2 test for trend = 4.4, p = 0.04) as well as that related to an elevated Quetelet index among postmenopausal women (OR, = 1.58  1.O-2.61 and OR, = 1.77 1.1-2.81, x 2 test for trend = 6.0, p = 0.01). Variables in Table I, except Quetelet index and age at menopause, will be taken as adjustment variables in a multivariate analysis of the nutritional factors in addition to other appropriate variables.
Mean weekly consumption of 21 groups of key items is FAT CONSUMPTION A N D BREAST CANCER Family history of breast cancer
(mother, sister) Past history of benign breast
disease Age at menopause (years) Age at menarche (years) x2 test for trend (p value) Parity x2 test for trend (p value) Age at first full-term pregnancy xz test for trend (p value) Education level (age at the end
of education) xz test for trend (p value) Quetelet index (weightlheight’) xz test for trend (p value) ‘Adjusted for age and menopausal status.
No Yes No Yes < 50 3 5 0 < I2 12-14 > 14 shown in Table I1 separately for cases and controls as well as the level of significance of the test of comparison after adjustment on age and menopausal status. The overall food intake of TABLE U - WEEKLY INTAKE OF FOOD GROUPS FOR CASES AND CONTROLS Meat Offal Processed F iws jrlk~~m~~e~at
I & k (liter) Butter and
cream Low-fat
cheese High-fat
cheese Yogurt Margarine Olive oil Other oils Salads Vegetables Citrus fruits Fruits rich in betacarotene Desserts and
chocolate Nuts Alcohol
(glasses) Total food Controls
515 Cases 409 Mean ‘After logarithmic transformation of the data and adjustment for age and menopausal status. the cases is significantly higher than that of the controls, and this is equally true for the consumption of high-fat cheese, desserts and chocolate, olive oil and alcohol. There are slighter differences concerning the consumption (higher in cases than in controls) of meat, processed pork meat, citrus fruits, fruits rich in (3-carotene and nuts, while that of margarine is somewhat lower in cases than in controls.
Adjusted odds ratios on the classical risk factors of Table I, age, menopausal status and alcohol consumption were then computed for the food items (cited above) which show some differences between cases and controls. There are significantly elevated ORs for processed pork meat, high-fat cheese, citrus fruits, fruits rich in (3-carotene, desserts and chocolates and overall food consumption. The test for linear trend is not significant for processed pork meat and only borderline for both categories of fruits. On the other hand, there is a clearly significant increasing trend for high-fat cheese, desserts and chocolate and total food consumption. For meat, olive oil and nuts neither ORs nor trends are significant. Note that all the ORs are moderate and never exceed 1.7. For margarine the adjusted OR is significantly below 1.
In a multivariate analysis, all food items of Table III were simultaneously considered as well as the adjustment variables (classical risk factors, age, menopausal status, and alcohol consumption). The only significant items are processed pork meat: OR, = 1.5 1.0-2.21, t = 1.92; high-fat cheese: OR, = 1.4 1.0-2.01, t = 2.05; desserts and chocolate: OR, = 1.6 1.1-2.41, t = 2.63; and margarine: OR = 0.65 0.5-0.9, t = 2.72; confirming overall the results of Table 111. When the multivariate analysis of all food items is carried out separately for pre- and post-menopausal women, the same items (processed pork meat, high-fat cheese, desserts and chocolate and margarine) exhibit significant ORs for postmenopausal women, while for pre-menopausal women the only statistically significant OR is that for margarine.
Table I V shows the risk of BC for 3 levels of weekly con
TABLE 111- RELATIVE RISK ESTIMATES FOR THE ASSOCIATION ;BETWEEN BREAST CANCER AND SELECTED
FOODS OR FOOD ITEMS ‘Foods or food items which had different mean weekly intake for cases and controls.-’Classes are defined with respect to weekly consumption. units as defined in Table II.-’Adjusted by logistic regression for age, menopausal status, alcohol consumption and all variables from Table I except Quetelet index. sumption of animal protein, total fat and its constituents after adjustment on the classical risks factors of Table I, age and menopausal status. The risk was increased significantly for total, animal, saturated and mono-unsaturated fat with a clearest trend for saturated fat. The ORs for the third tertile were all significant, staying nevertheless below 2. For animal protein the ORs were borderline significant and the test for trend was not significant.
The same nutrients were then investigated separately for preand post-menopausal women (Table V). For pre-menopausal women there exist significant increasing trends for total, animal and mono-unsaturated fat intake after adjustment. Saturated fat shows a weaker trend. The ORs for animal protein intake are not significant. No significant ORs were observed for poly-unsaturated fat or cholesterol intake (results not shown). For post-menopausal women, only saturated fat shows a significant increasing trend after adjustment (which included age at menopause) as well as significant ORs for the third tertile. Mono-unsaturated fat exhibits a significant OR for the second tertile but no clear trend.
Table VI displays the adjusted ORs for breast cancer related to the vitamin consumption apprehended in our study. For p-carotene and vitamin E intake there is no significant variation in the risk. For retinol, a significant increasing trend is shown which is essentially related to post-menopausal women.
A multivariate analysis of all the nutrients including alcohol consumption was then carried out. Beforehand, possible interactions were investigated and a significant negative interaction was found between alcohol and total fat intake (Table VII) .The ORs for a high intake of total fat are only significantly elevated for the women in the lowest class of alcohol consumption. This interaction will be taken into account in the logistic regressions. There is no interaction between total fat intake and menopausal status (Table VII).
A logistic regression model was fitted with the following independent variables: age, classical risk factors of Table I, and menopausal status which were forced, alcohol intake, total fat, protein, cholesterol, retinol, p-carotene and vitamin E intake, and an interaction term between alcohol and total fat intake. All variables were categorized in 3 classes, except for age. The interaction term (4 coefficients) was simplified by assuming equality of all the interaction coefficients in line with the pattern shown in Table VII. This assumption is also justified, as the improvement of the likelihood between a model with 4 interaction coefficients and a model assuming equality of all the interaction coefficients i s non-significant (x: = 1.54, NS).
In this first model, we found a significant negative interaction term between alcohol and total fat intake and significant ORs only for the main effect of total fat intake and alcohol intake (Table VIII). All the other nutrients have non-significant
ORs, in particular the ORs for animal protein adjusted on total 'Adjusted by logistic regression for age. menopausal status and all variables of Table 1 except Quetelet index. The tedle classes correspond to grams per week.-*lncluding linoleic acid (18.2) which accounts for about 48% of the total polyunsaturated intake. fat and alcohol intake have clearly decreased in comparison with the univariate analysis: OR, = 1.2 (0. & 1.7), OR, = 1.O (0.6-1.6).Fat and animal protein intake, which were both assessed comprehensively in our study, are important sources of calories. The ORs for this combined fat and protein caloric intake are significant (OR, = 1.4 1.0-2.01, OR, = 1.5 1.1-2.21) but weaker than those for total fat intake alone, indicating that this variable is not particularly relevant in our study.
The constituents of total fat were then considered separately for pre- and post-menopausal women in a logistic regression including age, the classical risk factors of Table I, age at menopause and Quetelet index for post-menopausal women only, alcohol intake, animal protein, saturated, mono-unsaturated and poly-unsaturated fat intake, retinol, p-carotene and vitamin E intake and 2 interaction terms between alcohol and saturated-fat intake and between alcohol and monounsaturated-fat intake. The results are different for pre- and post-menopausal women. For pre-menopausal women the only significant nutrient is mono-unsaturated fat, with ORs similar to those of Table V.
In contrast, for post-menopausal women, the ORs of saturated fat intake are significantlyincreased for both tertiles with a clear trend. Those for mono-unsaturated fat do not show a trend, with the OR for the second tertile of only borderline significance, and there is a significant negative interaction between alcohol intake and mono-unsaturated fat intake (Table IX).The OR for the third tertile of retinol is of borderline significance and those for animal protein show an inverse trend. As previously, the OR for the third tertile of Quetelet index is significantly elevated. In view of the inverse trend shown between saturated fat and animal protein intake, it did not seem relevant to consider their combined caloric intake.
DISCUSSION
Overall in our study we have found some evidence that BC risk is associated with lipid intake.
As in all hospital-based case-control studies, selection bias cannot be totally excluded. The first to be addressed is a referral bias, since the recruitment of neither cases nor controls is exhaustive for their respective diseases. Questionnaireselicited information on the area of residence, characterized as Nral, small towns or cities ( > 10O.O00 inhabitants). There is no difference between cases and controls in the sample distribution among these three classes, indicating that the controls recruited from the three hospitals had origins similarto those of the cases. There was also no difference in the proportion of cases and controls coming from the region LanguedocRoussillon or from ddpartements, indicating comparable geographic coverage. Further, the neurology and neurosurgery wards belong to the same hospital group as the cancer treatment center.
The second potential bias arises from the disease for which the controls were hospitalized. Our main concern was to avoid over-representation of a disease which could effect dietary practices. Care was taken to include only patients coming for a first diagnosis and not under treatment, and interviews were conducted shortly after diagnosis. Furthermore, the interviewers assessed the usual dietary history of the patients and not recent diet. Patients declaring recent changes in dietary habits were asked to recall their previous dietary habits. The average duration of nutritional habits reported by cases was similar to
TABLE V - RELATIVE RISK ESTIMATES FOR THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN BREAST CANCER AND PROTEIN AND FAT INTAKE IN PRE-MENOPAUSAL
AND PnCT-MFNOPAI 1CA1 WnMFN
Cases Controls OR' 95%CI
TABLE VI - RELATIVE RISK ESTIMATES FOR THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN BREAST CANCER AND RETINOL, P-CAROTENE AND VITAMIN E INTAKE IN
THE TOTAL STUDY POPULATION AND IN PRE-MENOPAUSAL AND
POST-MENOPAUSAL WOMEN
Cases Controls
OR' 954bCI
F.A. xz test for trend (p value) Post-menopausal women that of controls. There is no evidence that selective underdeclaration took place. Both cases and controls were patients in gard to lipid intake, the 3 wards had comparable consumption, a hospital and had similar motivation for answering. which was always lower than that of the cases. We also at
In their critical appraisal of the evidence that dietary fat tempted to compare the average intake for some food items or intake is related to BC risk in humans, Goodwin and Boyd nutrients of our controls with those reported in other studies. (1987) noted that in one case-control study which showed a The average lipid intake per week of the control is 812 g, positive association (Sarin et al., 1985), among the exclusion which is comparable with that found by Wquignot et al. (1980) criteria for the controls were coronary heart diseases and dia- among a representative sample of French families living in betes mellitus. They suggested that this could bias the results urban areas of different sizes. The recent study of Toniolo et toward finding a positive association, since the same exclu- al. (1989) was conducted in a Mediterranean population with sions were not applied in the case group. We have excluded somewhat similar nutritional habits to the population studied only cardiovascular diseases in the wards, where they are here. The daily meat (including poultry) consumption of conclearly over-represented, leaving a percentage of 3% of car- trols in our study is comparableto that found by Toniolo et al. diovascular pathologies in our controls. Further, medical his- (128 g in our study vs. 133 g), and similarly for saturated fat tory of hypertension and diabetes mellitus was recorded in our (34 g in our study vs. 32 g) and mono-unsaturated fat (38 g in questionnaire and found to be comparable among cases and our study vs. 39 g for the controls). controls: 16% for cases vs. 15%for controls for hypertension; Several arguments support the validity of the study nutri5.4% for cases vs. 5.8% for controls for diabetes. Therefore tional data. The dietary instrument used in our study was a our positive results are unlikely to be due to such bias. list-based dietary history of similar design to the one described hrposedly, we recruited controls in wards characterized by in Block er al. (1982) and adapted to our country according to different diagnosis referral: neurology, neurosurgery and gen- Pkquignot and Cubeau (1973), except that the food list was eral visceral surgery, in order to dilute the potential effect of restricted to key items for animal protein, lipid and some vispecific disease. Moreover, it has been checked that with re- tamin consumption. An evaluation of portion size, either di'Adjusted by logistic regression for age, all variables from Table I except Quetelet index and age at menopause for the post-menopausal group. The tertile classes correspond to grams per week.
xz test for homogeneity @ value) Classes of alcohol < 1 (glasses/week)
fD value) pre post
TABLE M - RELATIVE RISK ESTIMATES OF FAT. PROTEIN. RETINOL INTAKE AND ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION GIVEN BY LOGISTIC REGRESSfON
AMONG POST-MENOPAUSAL WOMEN
Variable
Category 'Adjusted for age, the classical risk factors of Table I and age at menopause. The tertile classes of the nutrients correspond to grams per week. rectly in grams for instance for meat, or by reference to a stated medium serving, was carried out, giving satisfactory quantification and comparability between individuals. Interviewers were clearly aware of the case or control status of the patient, but not of the specific objectives of the study. Since a large number of related food items are the source of a given nutrient, it is unlikely that any interviewing bias could influence the nutrient differences found between cases and controls.
The validity and reproducibility of such dietary questionnaires has been much discussed, and some of the issues have been recently reviewed by Block and Hartman (1989). There is evidence that quantitative history interviews restricted to key items are capable of capturing to a large extent the variation of a particular nutrient in a population (Willett et al., 1985). Our questionnaire was administered by an interviewer, and a recent r study by Sobell et al. (1989) tends to indicate that this improves the correlation with past diet. It is difficult to compare the variability of lipid intake between our study and others, since it is most often expressed as a variation of the proportion of calories derived by fat. This same proportion cannot be evaluated in our study since we could not calculate a total energy intake. Between the median of the lowest tertile and the highest tertile there is nevertheless a 2-fold increase or more for total fat, saturated fat and mono-unsaturated fat.
Another aspect of validation of a dietary instrument is the finding of some significant correlations between blood measurements and nutritional intake. This was discussed for a subsample of our study in Gerber et al. (1988, 1989). The assessment of dietary intake by questionnaire leads to some measurement errors and some subjects being misclassified in the categorical analysis. have shown that errors in reported dietary intake may account for a large part of the observed variation. Even if these measurement errors and m i s classification are non differential between cases and controls, the estimates will be biased conservatively and the control for confounding variables can be ineffective .
Our study supports the hypothesis of an association between BC risk and dietary fat intake which was shown to be particularly strong for saturated fat and BC in post-menopausal women. We come to this final result through successive steps, at first considering food groups, then nutrients and finally carrying out a multivariate analysis. As shown in Tables I1 and III, the overall food intake (even of citrus fruits) of the cases is larger than that of the controls, but all the clearly significant ORs concern food items containing lipids. Further, the ORs are increased for food items containing animal fat (high-fat cheese, dessert and chocolate and, to a less degree, processed pork meat). On the contrary, the consumption of margarine, which is made of vegetable fat, carries a lower risk.
The same food items remain significantly associated after multivariate adjustment, especially for post-menopausal women. With regard to high-fat cheese, our results can be compared with those of Nomura et al. (1978), L.2 et al. (1986), Toniolo et al. (1989) and Van't Veer et al. ( 1 9 9 0 ~ ) .This last study, as well as that of Lubin et al. (1981) and Iscovich et al. (1989), also report on the association of BC risk with desserts and biscuits. Some studies (Nomura et al., 1978; Lubin et al., 1981) have quoted a positive association of BC with margarine intake, but this item was always included in a grouping with other fatty foods. Among our controls, we checked that the dietary pattern of margarine users involved less animal fat, a pattern which could explain the inverse association.
Concerning the different fat constituents, the most significant ORs are related to saturated fat for post-menopausal women and to mono-unsaturated fat for pre-menopausal women (Table V). This can be explained by the specific dietary patterns of these 2 groups. The differences in consumption between cases and controls are larger for items rich in monounsaturated fat (meat, olive oil) for the pre-menopausal group than for the post-menopausal group. On the contrary, for postmenopausal women, the main differences concern high-fat cheese and processed pork meat. This might reflect an agerelated dietary pattern. Among the liposoluble vitamins, only retinol intake shows a significant increasing trend with elevated ORs for the third tertile, especially for post-menopausal women.
In Tables IV and V, no adjustment was made for alcohol consumption, in view of its negative interaction with lipid intake. Only when this interaction is taken into account does the effect of total fat become significant in the multivariate analysis. This negative interaction was necessary for the adjustment of a multiplicative model for the joint effect of alcohol and lipid intake, whereas in our data an additive model appeared more appropriate: the OR for women in the highest class of alcohol and total fat intake is 4.5, which corresponds to the sum minus one of an OR equal to 2 for the sole effect of total fat and an OR equal to 3.5 for the sole effect of alcohol.
Total caloric intake could not be evaluated with our data hence we were unable to consider caloric adjustment of the relationship for fat intake by the methods habitually used . Testing for a difference of effect between the calories of fat and animal protein could have been done, but was not deemed to be relevant in our data set, since there is no evidence of increased risk associated with the intake of animal protein.
Our results concerning the association with lipids and especially on the role of saturated fat in post-menopausal women are in line with the combined analysis of 12 case-control studies . Some of these studies have also found an increasing risk of BC in relation with the intake of animal protein, contrary to our study where the borderline association with animal protein intake in the total sample disappeared when lipid intake was taken into account in the multivariate analysis. We have no indication of any risk reduction with increased consumption of either vegetables (total or green) or p-carotene, which does not confirm the results of Katsouyanni et al. (1986), La Vecchia et al. (1987), Rohan et al. (1988), Iscovich et al. (1989), Van’t Veer et al. (1990b). The trend found for retinol in post-menopausal women was the opposite of that described by Graham et al. (1982) and is only weakly significant after the multivariate analysis, as expected in view of the higher consumption by cases of food items rich both in saturated fat and retinol.
Although several case control studies and most prospective studies did not find any evidence of an association between BC and dietary fat intake, there exist underlying biological mechanisms which give plausibility to the existence of this association. The main mechanisms suggested concern hormones, especially estrogens, because of the importance of hormonerelated risk factors in BC and of the experimental evidence that estrogen promotes tumor growth and can induce transforming factors in BC cells (Dickson et al., 1986). One of the most likely mechanisms involves an endogenous synthesis of estrogens from steroids in adipose tissues owing to the presence in adipocytes of the aromatase enzyme . This explanation is supported by the results of an intervention trial showing that reducing dietary fat intake from near 40% to 20% kilocalories, caused a 17% reduction in the average estradiol blood concentration (Prentice et a l . , 1990). In addition, large amounts of fat in the gut content might alter estrogenmetabolizing intestinal flora . Some studies have found that the association of energy intake with BC risk was stronger than the one with lipids. Since lipid-related calories are the last to metabolize, the net result of a high energy intake is lipid storage (Schutz et al., 1989). Thus, the risk association with high energy intake is not in contradiction with the risk associated with high lipid storage or Quetelet index, as we have found in our multivariate analysis of post-menopausal women. Finally, a mechanism has been invoked concerning the specific role of saturated fatty acids. They could modulate the peripheral activity of estrogens through the esterification of estradiol by fatty acids of the peripheral tissue. The estradiol esters formed with saturated fatty acids have more potent organ action than those formed with poly-unsaturated fatty acids . Thus normal plasma concentrations of estradiol may result in increased hormonal effect when there is an excess of saturated fat in the peripheral tissue.
In conclusion we have found evidence in our study of a positive association between dietary fat and BC in women and especially saturated fat in post-menopausal women. The findings support the rationale for dietary recommendations and intervention studies.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer. The authors thank Drs. Cadillac, Frerebeau, Labauge and Vlahovitch, from the neurology and neurosurgery wards (HBpital Gui-de-Chauliac), and their nursing staff for collaboration in control sample recruitment, and all medical, secretarial and nursing staff of Pr. Pujol’s department, Centre Paul Lamarque. We thank the anonymous referees for their very helpful suggestions and Mrs. E. Przybilski for her help in preparing the manuscript.
