published online only. To view please visit the journal online (▸htAtpd:/d/ditxio.dnoail.omrga/t1e0ri.a1l1is36/ jpmuebdligsheendeto-2n0li1n6e-o1n0l4y.12To5)v.iew please visit the journal online 1 1 CGenentrees,isUBnirveearsstitCyaHnocseprital of 2CMenatnrec,heUsnteivreCrseitnytrHeofsoprital of 2 CMenatnrec,heUsnteivreCrseitnytroef for 3ACceandtermalicMHaenaclhthestSecriences 3 4CCeennttrrealfMoraCnachnecestrePrrevention, AAcccceepptteedd 77 OOccttoobbeerr 22001166 jmedgenet-2016-104125 104 BRCAE2vanhsaDvEGev,abentesaeDl.nGJ,iMdeetednaGlt.ieJfinMeetde2d0aG1se7an;5ec4ta:21u001s4e6-;10o1:f10-.h7de.ordie:o1di0:i1.t10a1.r13y163/j6m/jemrdiegsdekgneontf-e2tb0-2r10e61a-61s-t014c01a42n152c5er due to their family history.
4
5
6
First:  please include Day Month Year doi:10.1136/ Jack Cuzick ABSTRACT 4
ABSTRACT genetic testing provides important risk information for Background Breast cancer familial risk clinics offer some women, panels of more common breast cancer risk screening and preventive strategies. While BRCA1/BRCA2 genetic variants may have relevance to greater numbers genetic testing provides important risk information for of women with familial risk. some women, panels of more common breast cancer risk
genetic variants may have relevance to greater numbers 18 SNPs were investigated in a case–control study of of women with familial risk. women attending a familial risk clinic. PRS were Methods Three polygenic risk scores (PRS) based on derived from published general European population 18 SNPs were investigated in a case–control study of allele ORs and frequencies (18-SNPs (SNP18)). In women attending a familial risk clinic. PRS were women with BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations, 3 SNPs/13 derived from published general European population
(691 BRCA1/2) by age last mammogram and BRCA1/2 total, 364 incident breast cancer cases (112 with genetic test result. 87 women with cancer before BRCA1/2 mutations) were matched with 1605 controls attendance were also considered. Logistic regression (691 BRCA1/2) by age last mammogram and BRCA1/2 was used to measure PRS performance through ORs genetic test result. 87 women with cancer before per IQR and calibration of the observed to expected (O/ attendance were also considered. Logistic regression
was used to measure PRS performance through ORs for phenotypic risk factors assessed by the Tyrer-Cuzick per IQR and calibration of the observed to expected (O/ (TC) model.
adjustment from TC (IQR OR 1.56, 95% CI 1.29 to BRCA1/2 mutations (IQR OR 1.55, 95% CI 1.29 to 1.89) or when prior cancers were included (IQR OR 1.87, O/E 96%). Findings were unaffected by 1.55, 95% CI 1.30 to 1.87). There was some evidence adjustment from TC (IQR OR 1.56, 95% CI 1.29 to to support polygenic scores with weights for individuals
with BRCA1/2 mutations (BRCA1 IQR OR 1.44, 95% 1.55, 95% CI 1.30 to 1.87). There was some evidence CI 1.17 to 1.76; BRCA2 IQ OR 1.44, 95% CI 0.90 to to support polygenic scores with weights for individuals 2.31). with BRCA1/2 mutations (BRCA1 IQR OR 1.44, 95%
CI 1.17 to 1.76; BRCA2 IQ OR 1.44, 95% CI 0.90 to assessment for women at increased familial risk who test 2.31). negative/have low likmealiyhoboeduosefdB RtoC Are1fi/n2e risk mutations.
Conclusions PRS
INTRODUCTION many women attending family history clinics.
Breast cancer is the most common malignancy
It is approximately twice as among women.
INTRODUCTION compared with t1he general population, among women. It is approximately common in first-degree relatives of affected women Breast cancer is the most common malignancy
indicattwice as ing that breast cancer risk has a substantial inhercommon in first-degree relatives of affected women
2–4 ited component. Mutations in B2RC3A1 and compared with the general population, indicatBRCA2 have been identified as a cause of hereditary ing that breast cancer risk has a substantial inherited component.
2–4
Mutations in
BRCA1 and 2,3 2,3 breast cancer, but they account for only around 15–20% of the familial component. mutations in these tumour suppressor genes lead to breast cancer, but they account for only around substantially increased inherited pre5di6sposition to 15–20% of the familial component. Pathogenic breast cancer with lifetime risks of up to 60– mutations in these tumour suppressor genes lead to
7–9 90%. Further high-risk genes include TP53, substantially increased inherited predisposition to CDH1, PTEN and STK11 and PALB2, but mutabreast cancer with lifetime risks of up to 60– tions 7in–9 these are extremely rare and make up only 90%. Further high-risk genes include TP53, a small proportion (∼1–2%) of cases of inherited CDH1, PTEN and STK11 and PALB2, but muta
6 breast cancer. Although some moderate-risk genes tions in these are extremely rare and make up only have also been identified conferring a twofold to a small proportion (∼1–2%) of cases of inherited threefold relat6ive risk of breast cancer (eg, CHEK2, breast cancer. Although some moderate-risk genes ATM), they account for ∼5% of the familial compohave also been identified conferring a twofold to nent and their utility for risk prediction is largely threefold relative risk of breast cancer (eg, CHEK2,
6 untested.
ATM), they account for ∼5% of the familial compo
Large-scale genome-wide association studies nent and their utility for risk prediction is largely focused on identifying
a large (GWAS) 6have untested. number of breast cancer-susceptibility alleles with
Large-scale genome-wide association studies much lower effect sizes. (GWAS) have focused 10–13 on
Altogether approxiidentifying a large mately 100 SNPs have now been associated with number of breast cancer-susceptibility alleles with
6 breast cancer risk, but10–t1h3e much lower effect sizes.
SNPs at 18 loci
Altogether approxi(SNP18) identified in 2010 account for about mately 100 SNPs have now been associated with two-third of the fam6 ilial component attributed by breast cancer risk, but the SNPs at 18 loci
6 12 the identified associated variants. There is evi(SNP18) identified in 2010 account for about dence to suggest that some of these genetic variants two-third of the familial component attributed by also alter the risk of breast cancer6 f1o2r women with the identified associated variants. There is evi
13–16 BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. Antoniou dence to suggest that some of these genetic variants
14 15 et al determined that nine of the common also alter the risk of breast cancer for women with breast cancer-susceptibility SNPs 13(a–1t6 the TOX3, BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. Antoniou FGFR124, 15MAP3K, LSP1, 2q35, SLC4A7, 1p11.2, et al determined that nine of the common 5p12, 6q25.1 loci) were associated with altered breast cancer-susceptibility SNPs (at the TOX3, penetrance in BRCA2 mutation carriers. More FGFR2, MAP3K, LSP1, 2q35, SLC4A7, 1p11.2, recent work from the Consortium of Investigators 5p12, 6q25.1 loci) were associated with altered of Modifiers of BRCA1/2 (CIMBA) consortium has penetrance in BRCA2 mutation carriers. More confirmed a contribution of SNPs to breast cancer recent work from the Consortium of Investigators
16 risk in BRCA1 carriers. We previously assessed 18 of Modifiers of BRCA1/2 (CIMBA) consortium has
12 variants (SNP18) in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation confirmed a contribution of SNPs to breast cancer carriers showing that 16using the risk weightings risk in BRCA1 carriers. We previously assessed 18 applied in the o1r2iginal report appear to predict variants (SNP18) in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation risk in women with BRCA2, but carriers showing that using the risk not BRCA1
weightings 17 mutations. applied in the original report appear to predict
The objective of this study was to assess the utility risk in women with BRCA2, but not BRCA1 of polygen1ic7 risk scores (PRS) in a familial screening mutations. clinic, with subdivision of women into those with
The objective of this study was to assess the utility and without BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. We tested of polygenic risk scores (PRS) in a familial screening the hypothesis that the individual’s SNP risk scores, clinic, with subdivision of women into those with generated from data from previous overview studies, and without BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. We tested combine independently for women at an elevated the hypothesis that the individual’s SNP risk scores, risk of breast cancer due to their family history. generated from data from previous overview studies, combine independently for women at an elevated 2,3 1,2,3 1,6
4 1,6 5 2,3 MATERIALS AND METHODS Participants A case–control study was designed to assess the predictive value of a combined SNP panel in women at increased risk of breast cancer due to their family history. Women with a family history of the disease attending the Genesis Prevention Centre in South Manchester for risk assessment and breast screening between 1987 and 2014 were recruited to a family history clinic. All breast cancers that occurred after entry to this clinic between 1987 and March 2014 were identified (first in June 1990), in addition to those previously diagnosed with breast cancer before they entered the clinic. Women with breast cancer and cancer-free controls were contacted between November 2010 and October 2013 to obtain informed consent and to provide a blood sample for DNA extraction if not already available. Of the 75 deceased cases, DNA was stored from 49 and consent was not required.
Assay methods Blood samples were taken from all women from which DNA was extracted, or pre-existing DNA samples (also previously extracted from blood) were used. BRCA1/2 mutation testing was carried out when clinically indicated (the prior probability of identifying a mutation must have met the threshold of BRCA1/2 likelihood probability ≥10% in accordance with UK clinical guidance,18 using the Manchester score19) using DNA Sanger sequencing and multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis of all exons and intron–exon boundaries.20 Relatives of those identified with BRCA1/2 mutations were offered cascade screening for the family-specific genetic mutation. All women were genotyped for 18 SNPs that have been shown to be associated with breast cancer risk in general European populations (FGFR2, CASP8, TOX3, MAP3K, 2q, CDKN2A, 10q22, COX11, NOTCH, 11q13, 10q21, SLC4A7, 6q25.1, 8q24, RAD51L1, LSP1, 5p12, 10q) as previously described.17 In brief, multiplex genotyping was performed using Sequenom iPlex Gold (Sequenom, San Diego, California, USA) and TaqMan assay (Life Technologies). Intra-plate duplicates and negative controls were included in all genotyping. Genotypes were verified by Scientific Data Systems (SDS) and MassARRAY TyperAnalyzer software.
Study design The primary end point was diagnosis of invasive breast cancer or ductal carcinoma in situ. Diagnosis of breast cancer was confirmed by hospital records or the North West Cancer Intelligence Service. Case–control matching was by age at last mammogram (±1 year) and BRCA1/2 genetic test result.
Controls were ineligible if they did not attend the clinic during the period of recruitment. Individuals without breast cancer, but with a BRCA1/2 mutation (BRCA1/2 controls) were matched as available, and 3–5 controls for individuals without BRCA1/2 mutations (table 2). The reason for matching cases and controls on age at mammogram was to ensure that an age when diseasefree and at risk of breast cancer was balanced between cases and controls. Dates of last follow-up were either date of breast cancer diagnosis or date the woman was last in contact with the risk clinic or other National Health Service (NHS) service, the date of risk-reducing mastectomy or of death.
A polygenic score was used to provide an overall relative risk estimate. We calculated the OR for each of the three SNP genotypes (no risk alleles, one risk allele and two risk alleles) from published per-allele ORs, assuming independence and normalising by an assumed risk allele frequency.12 Assay failures were SNP ignored in the SNP score by imputing a relative risk of 1.0 when they occurred. An overall SNP risk score for each woman was formed by multiplying the genotype ORs for together (table 1).
Phenotypic risk was assessed using predicted 10-year risks, and over the total follow-up period, from the Tyrer-Cuzick (TC) model (V.7.02). The following information from a risk questionnaire was incorporated: age at baseline; second-degree relatives (age affected by breast and ovarian cancer or current age or age at death); age at first child, menarche and menopause; height and weight; and history of prior benign breast disease.
Analysis methods Quality control of the assay was tested by assessing Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) for each SNP by comparing the observed number of homozygotes against expected assuming independence and by concordance between duplicate samples.
Phenotypic risk factors at entry in the non-BRCA1/2 mutation cases and controls and the complete cohort to 2014 were tabulated. A Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used for differences in age at entry for cases and controls. Analysis was stratified by BRCA1/ 2 testing groups ( positive or not). The main test statistic was a univariate likelihood ratio (LR) χ2 (df=1) for the risk associated with the log PRS. ORs were estimated by logistic regression and CIs by profile likelihood. In non-BRCA1/2 carriers and
Chromosome prospective cases, the model also included the logarithm absolute risk from the TC model over the follow-up period for each woman. The Spearman correlation was calculated between TC 10-year risk and SNP18 in controls. Unadjusted area under the receiver operating curve (AUC) was used as a secondary measure of discrimination with DeLong CIs.21 CIs for observed divided by expected proportions used Wilson’s method for the binomial parameter. The change in lifetime risk categories calculated by lifetables (Manchester method19 22 23) was assessed. They were chosen to be relevant to UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines18 of average 8–16%, moderately high 17–29%, high 30–39% and very high 40%+, and US MRI guidelines (above and below upper limit of 25%24).
Analysis was carried out in GNU R V.3.1.1 (R Core Team (2014). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. http://www.R-project.org/).
RESULTS In total, 9222 women were seen at the family history clinic between 1987 and 2012 to assess breast cancer risk and initiate screening if appropriate. Also, 489 individuals were diagnosed with breast cancer after entry to the clinic, and of these 364 (112 with BRCA1/2 mutation) were recruited to this study and provided a blood sample from which DNA was extracted. A total of 87 women with breast cancer prior to initial clinic attendance were also recruited. In total, there were 1605 controls (691 with BRCA1/2 mutations). A summary of the composition of the sample separated by BRCA1/2 testing status (individual and family) is shown in table 2. In the case–control study, there were 16 832 years of follow-up (median 7.9 years) from recruitment to the clinic to the last follow-up or breast cancer. The median year of entry to the clinic for the prospective cases was 1996 (IQR 1993–2002), it was 2004 (IQR 1998– 2009) for controls.
A comparison of the distribution of phenotypic risk factors and 10-year risk at baseline in individuals without BRCA1/2 mutations shows that the non-BRCA1/2 controls were at a slightly higher risk of breast cancer than the overall cohort, being older and with a more substantial family history of the disease (table 3). The non-BRCA1/2 controls were also younger at entry than non-BRCA1/2 cases ( p < 0.001). The BRCA1/2 cases and controls had a similar age at entry (controls: median 39, IQR 32–46; cases: 37, 33–45; p=0.3).
Quality control of the genotyping was satisfactory: the call rate for each SNP was > 98%, and HWE was verified separately by BRCA1/2 mutation group (see online supplementary material).
SNP18 in the group without BRCA1/2 mutations was a significant predictive risk factor (LR χ2 22.7, p < 0.001, table 4), with an IQR OR of 1.55 (95% CI 1.30 to 1.87) and AUC 0.59 (0.55 to 0.63). Findings were similar when non-prospective cases were excluded. SNP18 was not correlated with TC 10-year risks (Spearman correlation 0.01 in controls, p=0.7) and was predictive when adjusted for TC risk over the period from entry to last follow-up (IQR OR 1.56, 95% CI 1.29 to 1.89). SNP scores in the BRCA1/2 mutation-positive groups suggested that they might refine risk, but analysis was limited by sample size and the strength of the predictor.
Figure 1A plots histograms of SNP18 in cases and controls without BRCA1/2 mutations. Analysis of SNP18 by quintiles is shown in table 5. There was more than a twofold higher risk between the bottom and top quintiles of SNP18 in women without BRCA1/2 mutations. The observed risk was also close to expected, being 96% (95% CI 56% to 136%) of expected in the complete data. This excellent calibration is further illustrated in figure 1B, C. The predicted risk was 100% (95% CI 57% to 142%) of expected after adjustment for risk from classical factors.
A substantial proportion of the unaffected women without BRCA1/2 mutations moved between clinically relevant lifetime risk categories if an unadjusted PRS was used. Of the 914 controls who did not test positive for BRCA1/2 mutation, 475 (52%) moved category with 432 (25%) moving up a category and 443 (27%) moving down. Using a 25% lifetime risk threshold, 32/174 (18%) moved up into this category, whereas 149/ 740 (20%) moved down from this category.
DISCUSSION SNP18 was predictive of breast cancer risk for women who did not test positive for BRCA1/2 mutations as observed risks were
Phenotypic risk characteristics at entry in the complete cohort and BRCA1/2 negative or untested samples from study 1.55 1.56 1.44 1.44
AUC, area under the receiver operating characteristic; LR χ2, likelihood ratio test statistic; PRS, polygenic risk score; TC, Tyrer-Cuzick absolute risk over follow-up period. very close to expected. Findings were unaffected by adjustment from the TC model based on classical phenotypic risk factors or when prior cancers were included. Polygenic scores for women with BRCA1/2 mutations were also informative, although analysis was limited by sample size and strength of these predictors.
Our data suggest that PRS may be used to refine risk assessment for women already at increased familial risk without BRCA1/2 mutations. PRS are likely to have a substantial impact on prevention strategies recommended for a woman based on her lifetime risk estimate.
Our study has several limitations. First, those who consented to join the study as controls were at a higher risk than the overall cohort. This meant that we were unable to assess how much the SNP score added in comparison with the TC model.
However, there was no association between the PRS and risk from the TC model, and findings were unchanged after adjustment for phenotypic risk. Second, not all of the groups defined as without BRCA1/2 mutations had been tested for BRCA1/2 and therefore will include a number of individuals with mutations. This number will be small as all were below the NHS testing threshold of 10% a priori risk of mutation detection in England and Wales.18 Among the 124 untested prospective breast cancers, we estimate no more than 5% would harbour a BRCA1/2 mutation based on Manchester score; approximately six women. Among the untested unaffected women, we would assess an even smaller proportion may harbour BRCA1/2 mutations. As such, this should have a very small effect on our results. Finally, we note that many of the BRCA1 cohort were part of the EMBRACE project and were therefore used (with many other samples) to estimate the ORs for BRCA1 carriers through CIMBA. Analysis excluding these is very limited, and there are only eight BRCA1 controls. However, the results (see online supplementary material) at least show that ORs are in the correct direction for those who were not part of EMBRACE.
The predicted risk of SNP18 matched the observed risk and also held true after adjustment for risk from classical factors.
This has important implications for provision of breast cancer risk information in clinics similar to the one in this study because it suggests that SNP scores can be used to refine risks in women already at increased risk from their family history. If women without breast cancer are undergoing genetic testing for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations either as stand-alone tests or as part of a panel, use of multiple SNP testing could be considered at the same time. The great majority of women tested for BRCA1/2 receive a negative ‘uninformative’ results, which in most instances will only slightly reduce their predicted risk of breast cancer. For these women, an SNP PRS would provide a more meaningful result once BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations have been excluded. Use of SNP18 PRS resulted in over half of women changing a NICE-defined risk category. A substantial proportion of (18–20%) of women in our familial risk clinic also crossed the upper 25% lifetime risk boundary used in North America24 to determine eligibility for MRI screening.
It is likely that use of a PRS may have more added value than extended gene mutation panel tests of moderate and highly penetrant genes. In a study of 198 women referred for BRCA1/2 testing, 57 (29%) harboured pathogenic mutations in BRCA1/ 2.25 A further 16 had what were classified as pathogenic mutations in the extended panel of 42 genes. However, the concept of what were ‘actionable’ (identifies pathogenic mutations in genes that substantially affect risk) mutations is debatable, especially when restricted to breast cancer. Only three women (2%) without a BRCA1/2 mutation had a really useful result from the extended panel test. In contrast, an SNP PRS would provide an adjusted overall risk for all women testing negative for BRCA1/2 mutations.
There is supporting evidence that our results may generalise to other settings. Importantly, our analysis used predefined SNP ORs from large case–control studies of the general population:13 26 SNP risks were not calibrated to this case–control study. A further study from the Australian Family registry also showed that using an SNP PRS derived from these estimates added significantly to the prediction from risk algorithms including Breast and Ovarian Analysis of Disease Incidence and Carrier Estimation Algorithm (BOADICEA), BRCAPRO and TC,27 although the observed risk appeared to be less than expected. In terms of BRCA1/2 carriers, many of the SNPs have not been shown to add value for risk assessment. For women with BRCA1 mutations, only three SNPs add value,14 15 which is not surprising because the majority of cancers in this patient group are oestrogen receptor negative (whereas most of the SNP18 variants are associated with oestrogen receptor-positive breast cancer). Our data support the previous GWAS studies that suggest for an accurate risk for BRCA1/2 a different weighting is required for each SNP than that applied to the general population. The prediction in table 4 shows that SNP18 with iCOGS weightings for BRCA1 has a non-significant prediction that improved by using just the three SNPs validated with CIMBA weightings. Similarly, although there was partial prediction in BRCA2 carriers from SNP18, this improved by using CIMBA BRCA2 weightings. We have previously used BRCA1 weightings in three SNPs validated for a BRCA1 (mutationpositive group14 15). A data set of 462 BRCA1 carriers with 269 cancers showed no validity for the three SNPs.17 The results for SNP3 in BRCA1 carriers in the present data set were driven by rs3757318 in ESR1. The individual effect for this SNP was larger than expected (see online supplementary material). In summary, the current study provides evidence for utility of using a selected panel of risk-associated SNPs in the familial risk clinic in non-BRCA1/2 mutation carriers to refine risk estimations.26 28 We advise using the iCOGS weightings in women at high risk of a BRCA1/2 mutation only if BRCA1/2 testing has already been undertaken and has proven negative or is undertaken at the same time. If women test positive for a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation, then different algorithms are needed if an SNP risk prediction element is to be used to refine their risk estimate.
writing: all. Approval of final version: all.
7 8 9 10 11 12 13
Robinson SP, Sahai E, Saxton JM, Schmid P, Smalley MJ, Speirs V, Stein R, Stingl J, Streuli CH, Tutt AN, Velikova G, Walker RA, Watson CJ, Williams KJ, Young LS, Thompson AM. Critical research gaps and translational priorities for the successful prevention and treatment of breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res 2013;15:R92. Evans DG, Shenton A, Woodward E, Lalloo F, Howell A, Maher ER. Penetrance estimates for BRCA1 and BRCA2 based on genetic testing in a Clinical Cancer
cancer burden in the family. BMC Cancer 2008;8:155.
Mavaddat N, Peock S, Frost D, Ellis S, Platte R, Fineberg E, Evans DG, Izatt L, Eeles RA, Adlard J, Davidson R, Eccles D, Cole T, Cook J, Brewer C, Tischkowitz M, Douglas F, Hodgson S, Walker L, Porteous ME, Morrison PJ, Side LE, Kennedy MJ, Houghton C, Donaldson A, Rogers MT, Dorkins H, Miedzybrodzka Z, Gregory H, Eason J, Barwell J, McCann E, Murray A, Antoniou AC, Easton DF, EMBRACE. Cancer Risks for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers: results from prospective analysis of EMBRACE. J Natl Cancer Inst 2013;105:812–22.
Evans DG, Harkness E, Lalloo F, Howell A. Long-term prospective clinical follow-up after BRCA1/2 presymptomatic testing: BRCA2 risks higher than in adjusted retrospective studies. 2014;51:573–80.
Easton DF, Pooley KA, Dunning AM, Pharoah PDP, Thompson D, Ballinger DG, Struewing JP, Morrison J, Field H, Luben R, Wareham N, Ahmed S, Healey CS, Bowman R, Meyer KB, Haiman CA, Kolonel LK, Henderson BE, Le Marchand L, Brennan P, Sangrajrang S, Gaborieau V, Odefrey F, Shen CY, Wu PE, Wang HC, Eccles D, Evans DG, Peto J, Fletcher O, Johnson N, Seal S, Stratton MR, Rahman N, Chenevix-Trench G, Bojesen SE, Nordestgaard BG, Axelsson CK, Garcia-Closas M, Brinton L, Chanock S, Lissowska J, Peplonska B, Nevanlinna H, Fagerholm R, Eerola H, Kang D, Yoo KY, Noh DY, Ahn SH, Hunter DJ, Hankinson SE, Cox DG, Hall P, Wedren S, Liu J, Low YL, Bogdanova N, Schurmann P, Dork T, Tollenaar RAEM, Jacobi CE, Devilee P, Klijn JGM, Sigurdson AJ, Doody MM, Alexander BH, Zhang J, Cox A, Brock IW, MacPherson G, Reed MWR, Couch FJ, Goode EL, Olson JE, Meijers-Heijboer H, van den Ouweland A, Uitterlinden A, Rivadeneira F, Milne RL, Ribas G, Gonzalez-Neira A, Benitez J, Hopper JL, McCredie M, Southey M, Giles GG, Schroen C, Justenhoven C, Brauch H, Hamann U, Ko YD, Spurdle AB, Beesley J, Chen X, Mannermaa A, Kosma VM, Kataja V, Hartikainen J, Day NE, Cox DR,
susceptibility loci. Nature 2007;447:1087–93.
Stacey SN, Manolescu A, Sulem P, Rafnar T, Gudmundsson J, Gudjonsson SA, Masson G, Jakobsdottir M, Thorlacius S, Helgason A, Aben KK, Strobbe LJ, Albers-Akkers MT, Swinkels DW, Henderson BE, Kolonel LN, Le Marchand L, Millastre E, Andres R, Godino J, Dolores M, Polo E, Tres A, Mouy M, Saemundsdottir J, Backman VM, Gudmundsson L, Kristjansson K, Bergthorsson JT, Kostic J, Frigge ML, Geller F, Gudbjartsson D, Sigurdsson H, Jonsdottir T, Hrafnkelsson J, Johannsson J, Sveinsson T, Myrdal G, Niels H, Jonsson T, von Holst S, Werelius B, Margolin S, Lindblom A, Mayordomo JI, Haiman CA, Kiemeney LA, Th O, Gulcher JR, Thorsteinsdottir U, Kong A, Stefansson K. Common variants on chromosomes 2q35 and 16q12 confer susceptibility to estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. Nat Genet 2007;39:865–86.
Turnbull C, Ahmed S, Morrison J, Pernet D, Renwick A, Maranian M, Seal S, Ghoussaini M, Hines S, Healey CS, Hughes D, Warren-Perry M, Tapper W, Eccles D, Evans DG, Hooning M, Schutte M, van den Ouweland A, Houlston R, Ross G, Langford C, Pharoah PDP, Stratton MR, Dunning AM, Rahman N, Easton DF.
Nat Genet 2010;42:504–7.
Michailidou K, Hall P, Gonzalez-Neira A, Ghoussaini M, Dennis J, Milne RL, Schmidt MK, Chang-Claude J, Bojesen SE, Bolla MK, Wang Q, Dicks E, Lee A, Turnbull C, Rahman N, Fletcher O, Peto J, Gibson L, dos Santos Silva I, Nevanlinna H, Muranen
Meijers-Heijboer H, Adank M, van der Luijt RB, Hein R, Dahmen N, Beckman L, Meindl A, Schmutzler RK, Muller-Myhsok B, Lichtner P, Hopper JL, Southey MC, Makalic E, Schmidt DF, Uitterlinden AG, Hofman A, Hunter DJ, Chanock SJ, Vincent D, Bacot F, Tessier DC, Canisius S, Wessels LFA, Haiman CA, Shah M, Luben R, Brown J, Luccarini C, Schoof N, Humphreys K, Li J, Nordestgaard BG, Nielsen SF, Flyger H, Couch FJ, Wang X, Vachon C, Stevens KN, Lambrechts D, Moisse M, Paridaens R, Christiaens MR, Rudolph A, Nickels S, Flesch-Janys D, Johnson N, Aitken Z, Aaltonen K, Heikkinen T, Broeks A, Veer LJ, van der Schoot CE, Guenel P, Truong T, Laurent-Puig P, Menegaux F, Marme F, Schneeweiss A, Sohn C, Burwinkel B, Zamora MP, Perez JI, Pita G, Alonso MR, Cox A, Brock IW, Cross SS, Reed MWR, Sawyer EJ, Tomlinson I, Kerin MJ, Miller N, Henderson BE, Schumacher F, Le Marchand L, Andrulis IL, Knight JA, Glendon G, Mulligan AM, Lindblom A, Margolin S, Hooning MJ, Hollestelle A, van den Ouweland AMW, Jager A, Bui QM, Stone J, Dite GS, Apicella C, Tsimiklis H, Giles GG, Severi G, Baglietto L, Fasching PA, Haeberle L, Ekici AB, Beckmann MW, Brenner H, Muller H, Arndt V, Stegmaier C, Swerdlow A, Ashworth A, Orr N, Jones M, Figueroa J, Lissowska J, Brinton L, Goldberg MS, Labreche F, Dumont M, Winqvist R, Pylkas K, Jukkola-Vuorinen A, Grip M, Brauch H, Hamann U, Bruning T, Radice P, Peterlongo P, Manoukian S, Bonanni B, Devilee P, Tollenaar RAEM, Seynaeve C, van Asperen CJ, Jakubowska A, Lubinski J, Jaworska K, Durda K, Mannermaa A, Kataja V, Kosma VM, Hartikainen JM, Bogdanova NV, Antonenkova NN, Dork T, Kristensen VN, Anton-Culver H, Slager S, Toland AE, Edge S, Fostira F, Kang D, Yoo KY, Noh DY, Matsuo K, Ito H, 14 15 16 Iwata H, Sueta A, Wu AH, Tseng CC, Van Den Berg D, Stram DO, Shu XO, Lu W, Gao YT, Cai H, Teo SH, Yip CH, Phuah SY, Cornes BK, Hartman M, Miao H, Lim WY, Sng JH, Muir K, Lophatananon A, Stewart-Brown S, Siriwanarangsan P, Shen CY, Hsiung CN, Wu PE, Ding SL, Sangrajrang S, Gaborieau V, Brennan P, McKay J, Blot WJ, Signorello LB, Cai Q, Zheng W, Deming-Halverson S, Shrubsole M, Long J, Simard J, Garcia-Closas M, Pharoah PDP, Chenevix-Trench G, Dunning AM, Benitez
cancer risk. Nat Genet 2013;45:353–61.
Antoniou AC, Beesley J, McGuffog L, Sinilnikova OM, Healey S, Neuhausen SL, Ding YC, Rebbeck TR, Weitzel JN, Lynch HT, Isaacs C, Ganz PA, Tomlinson G, Olopade OI, Couch FJ, Wang X, Lindor NM, Pankratz VS, Radice P, Manoukian S, Peissel B,
M, Claes K, Poppe B, Foretova L, Mai PL, Greene MH, Rennert G, Lejbkowicz F, Glendon G, Ozcelik H, Andrulis IL, Thomassen M, Gerdes AM, Sunde L, Cruger D, Jensen UB, Caligo M, Friedman E, Kaufman B, Laitman Y, Milgrom R, Dubrovsky M, Cohen S, Borg A, Jernström H, Lindblom A, Rantala J, Stenmark-Askmalm M, Melin B, Nathanson K, Domchek S, Jakubowska A, Lubinski J, Huzarski T, Osorio A, Lasa A, Durán M, Tejada MI, Godino J, Benitez J, Hamann U, Kriege M, Hoogerbrugge N, van der Luijt RB, van Asperen CJ, Devilee P, Meijers-Heijboer EJ, Blok MJ, Aalfs CM, Hogervorst F, Rookus M, Cook M, Oliver C, Frost D, Conroy D, Evans DG, Lalloo F, Pichert G, Davidson R, Cole T, Cook J, Paterson J, Hodgson S, Morrison PJ, Porteous ME, Walker L, Kennedy MJ, Dorkins H, Peock S, Godwin AK, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, de Pauw A, Mazoyer S, Bonadona V, Lasset C, Dreyfus H, Leroux D, Hardouin A, Berthet P, Faivre L, Loustalot C, Noguchi T, Sobol H, Rouleau E, Nogues C, Frénay M, Vénat-Bouvet L, Hopper JL, Daly MB, Terry MB, John EM, Buys SS, Yassin Y, Miron A, Goldgar D, Singer CF, Dressler AC, Gschwantler-Kaulich
Dutra-Clarke A, Piedmonte M, Rodriguez GC, Wakeley K, Boggess JF, Basil J, Schwartz PE, Blank SV, Toland AE, Montagna M, Casella C, Imyanitov E, Tihomirova L, Blanco I, Lazaro C, Ramus SJ, Sucheston L, Karlan BY, Gross J, Schmutzler R, Wappenschmidt B, Engel C, Meindl A, Lochmann M, Arnold N, Heidemann S, Varon-Mateeva R, Niederacher D, Sutter C, Deissler H, Gadzicki D, Preisler-Adams S, Kast K, Schönbuchner I, Caldes T, de la Hoya M, Aittomäki K, Nevanlinna H, Simard J, Spurdle AB, Holland H, Chen X, Platte R, Chenevix-Trench G, Easton DF. Common breast cancer susceptibility alleles and the risk of breast cancer for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers: implications for risk prediction. Cancer Res 2010;70:9742–54.
Antoniou AC, Kartsonaki C, Sinilnikova OM, Soucy P, McGuffog L, Healey S, Lee A, Peterlongo P, Manoukian S, Peissel B, Zaffaroni D, Cattaneo E, Barile M, Pensotti V, Pasini B, Dolcetti R, Giannini G, Putignano ALL, Varesco L, Radice P, Mai PL, Greene MH, Andrulis IL, Glendon G, Ozcelik H, Thomassen M, Gerdes AMM, Kruse TA, Birk Jensen U, Crüger DG, Caligo MA, Laitman Y, Milgrom R, Kaufman B, Paluch-Shimon S, Friedman E, Loman N, Harbst K, Lindblom A, Arver B, Ehrencrona H, Melin B, SWE-BRCA Nathanson KL, Domchek SM, Rebbeck T, Jakubowska A, Lubinski J, Gronwald J, Huzarski T, Byrski T, Cybulski C, Gorski B, Osorio A, Ramón y Cajal T, Fostira F, Andrés R, Benitez J, Hamann U, Hogervorst FB, Rookus MA, Hooning MJ, Nelen MR, van der Luijt RB, van Os TA, van Asperen CJ, Devilee P, Meijers-Heijboer HE, Gómez Garcia EB, HEBON Peock S, Cook M, Frost D, Platte R, Leyland J, Evans DG, Lalloo F, Eeles R, Izatt L, Adlard J, Davidson R, Eccles D, Ong KrR, Cook J, Douglas F, Paterson J, Kennedy MJ, Miedzybrodzka Z, EMBRACE, Godwin A, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Buecher B, Belotti M, Tirapo C, Mazoyer S, Barjhoux L, Lasset C, Leroux D, Faivre L, Bronner M, Prieur F, Nogues C, Rouleau E, Pujol P, Coupier I, Frénay M, CEMO Study Collaborators, Hopper JL, Daly MB, Terry MB, John EM, Buys SS, Yassin Y, Miron A, Goldgar D, Breast Cancer Family Registry, Singer CF, Tea MKK, Pfeiler G, Dressler ACC, Hansen Tv, Jønson L, Ejlertsen B,
J, Blank S, Basil J, Azodi M, Toland AEE, Montagna M, Tognazzo S, Agata S, Imyanitov E, Janavicius R, Lazaro C, Blanco I, Pharoah PD, Sucheston L, Karlan BY, Walsh CS, Olah E, Bozsik A, Teo SHH, Seldon JL, Beattie MS, van Rensburg EJ, Sluiter MD, Diez O, Schmutzler RK, Wappenschmidt B, Engel C, Meindl A, Ruehl I, Varon-Mateeva R, Kast K, Deissler H, Niederacher D, Arnold N, Gadzicki D, Schönbuchner I, Caldes T, de la Hoya M, Nevanlinna H, Aittomäki K, Dumont M, Chiquette J, Tischkowitz M, Chen X, Beesley J, Spurdle AB, kConFab investigators, Neuhausen SL, Chun Ding Y, Fredericksen Z, Wang X, Pankratz VS, Couch F, Simard J, Easton DF, Chenevix-Trench G, CIMBA. Common alleles at 6q25.1 and 1p11.2 are associated with breast cancer risk for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. Hum Mol Genet 2011;20:3304–21.
Couch FJ, Wang X, McGuffog L, Lee A, Olswold C, Kuchenbaecker KB, Soucy P, Fredericksen Z, Barrowdale D, Dennis J, Gaudet MM, Dicks E, Kosel M, Healey S, Sinilnikova OM, Lee A, Bacot F, Vincent D, Hogervorst FB, Peock S, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Jakubowska A, kConFab Investigators, Radice P, Katharina R, SWE-BRCA Domchek SM, Piedmonte M, Singer CF, Friedman E, Thomassen M, Ontario Cancer Genetics Network, Hansen TV, Neuhausen SL, Szabo CI, Blanco I, Greene MH, Karlan BY, Garber J, Phelan CM, Weitzel JN, Montagna M, Olah E, Andrulis IL, Godwin AK, Yannoukakos D, Goldgar DE, Caldes T, Nevanlinna H, Osorio A, Beth M, Daly MB, van Rensburg EJ, Hamann U, Ramus SJ, Ewart A, Caligo MA, Olopade OI, Tung N, Claes K, Beattie MS, Southey MC, Imyanitov EN, Tischkowitz M, Janavicius R, John EM, Kwong A, Diez O, Balmaña J, Barkardottir RB, Arun BK, C a n c e r g e n e t i c s 20 21 22
Rennert G, Teo SHH, Ganz PA, Campbell I, van der Hout AH, van Deurzen CH, Seynaeve C, Gómez Garcia EB, van Leeuwen FE, Meijers-Heijboer HE, Gille JJ, Ausems MG, Blok MJ, Ligtenberg MJ, Rookus MA, Devilee P, Verhoef S, van Os TA, Wijnen JT, HEBON EMBRACE, Frost D, Ellis S, Fineberg E, Platte R, Evans GG, Izatt L, Eeles RA, Adlard J, Eccles DM, Cook J, Brewer C, Douglas F, Hodgson S, Morrison PJ, Side LE, Donaldson A, Houghton C, Rogers MT, Dorkins H, Eason J, Gregory H, McCann E, Murray A, Calender A, Hardouin A, Berthet P, Delnatte C, Nogues C, Lasset C, Houdayer C, Leroux D, Rouleau E, Prieur F, Damiola F, Sobol H, Coupier I, Venat-Bouvet L, Castera L, Gauthier-Villars M, Léoné M, Pujol P,
Gronwald J, Lubinski J, Durda K, Jaworska K, Huzarski T, Spurdle AB, Viel A, Peissel B, Bonanni B, Melloni G, Ottini L, Papi L, Varesco L, Grazia M, Peterlongo P, Volorio S, Manoukian S, Pensotti V, Arnold N, Engel C, Deissler H, Gadzicki D, Gehrig A, Kast K, Rhiem K, Meindl A, Niederacher D, Ditsch N, Plendl H, Preisler-Adams S, Engert S, Sutter C, Varon-Mateeva R, Wappenschmidt B, Weber BH, Arver B, Stenmark-Askmalm M, Loman N, Rosenquist R, Einbeigi Z, Nathanson KL, Rebbeck TR, Blank SV, Cohn DE, Rodriguez GC, Small L, Friedlander M, Bae-Jump VL, Fink-Retter A, Rappaport C, Gschwantler-Kaulich D, Pfeiler G, Tea MKK, Lindor NM, Kaufman B, Paluch SS, Laitman Y, Skytte ABB, Gerdes AMM, Sokilde I, Traasdahl S, Kruse TA, Birk U, Vijai J, Sarrel K, Robson M, Kauff N, Marie A, Glendon G, Ozcelik H, Ejlertsen B, Nielsen FC, Jønson L, Andersen MK, Chun Y, Steele L, Foretova L, Teulé A, Lazaro C, Brunet J, Angel M, Mai PL, Loud JT, Walsh C, Lester J, Orsulic S, Narod SA, Herzog J, Sand SR, Tognazzo S, Agata S, Vaszko T, Weaver J, Stavropoulou AV, Buys SS, Romero A, de la Hoya M, Aittomäki K,
Senter L, Huo D, Chan SB, Sokolenko AP, Chiquette J, Tihomirova L, Friebel TM, Agnarsson BA, Lu KH, Lejbkowicz F, James PA, Hall P, Dunning AM, Tessier D, Cunningham J, Slager SL, Wang C, Hart S, Stevens K, Simard J, Pastinen T, Pankratz
association study in BRCA1 mutation carriers identifies novel loci associated with breast and ovarian cancer risk. PLoS Genet 2013;9:e1003212.
Ingham SL, Warwick J, Byers H, Lalloo F, Newman WG, Evans DG. Is multiple SNP testing in BRCA2 and BRCA1 female carriers ready for use in clinical practice?
Easton D, Emery J, Gray J, Halpin J, Hopwood P, McKay J, Sheppard C, Sibbering M, Watson W, Wailoo A, Hutchinson A, McIntosh A, Shaw C, Evans G, Turnbull N, Bahar N, Barclay M, et al. Clinical guidelines and evidence review for the classification and care of women at risk of familial breast cancer. London:
guideline, 2004 (updated 2006, 2013). http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg164 Evans DG, Lalloo F, Cramer A, Jones EA, Knox F, Amir E, Howell A. Addition of pathology and biomarker information significantly improves the performance of the Manchester scoring system for BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing. J Med Genet 2009;46:811–17.
Byers H, Wallis Y, van Veen EM, Lalloo F, Reay K, Smith P, Wallace AJ, Bowers N, Newman WG, Evans DG. Sensitivity of BRCA1/2 testing in high-risk breast/ovarian/ male breast cancer families: little contribution of comprehensive RNA/NGS panel testing. Eur J Hum Genet 2016;24:1591–97.
DeLong ER, DeLong DM, Clarke-Pearson DL. Comparing the areas under two or more correlated receiver operating characteristic curves: a nonparametric approach. Biometrics 1988;44:837–45.
Evans DGR, Lalloo F. Risk assessment and management of high risk familial breast cancer. J Med Genet 2002;39:865–71. 23 24 25 26 27 28 C a n c e r g e n e t i c s Evans DGR, Ingham S, Dawe S, Roberts L, Lalloo F, Brentnall AR, Stavrinos P, Howell A. Breast cancer risk assessment in 8,824 women attending a family history evaluation and screening programme. Fam Cancer 2014;13:189–96. http://www.cancer.org/cancer/breastcancer/moreinformation/ breastcancerearlydetection/breast-cancer-early-detection-acs-recs (accessed 23 Jun 2016).
Kurian AW, Hare EE, Mills MA, Kingham KE, McPherson L, Whittemore AS, McGuire V, Ladabaum U, Kobayashi Y, Lincoln SE, Cargill M, Ford JM. Clinical evaluation of a multiple-gene sequencing panel for hereditary cancer risk assessment. J Clin Oncol 2014;32:2001–9.
Mavaddat N, Pharoah PDP, Michailidou K, Tyrer J, Brook MN, Bolla MK, Wang Q, Dennis J, Dunning AM, Shah M, Luben R, Brown J, Bojesen SE, Nordestgaard BG, Nielsen SF, Flyger H, Czene K, Darabi H, Eriksson M, Peto J, dos Santos-Silva I, Dudbridge F, Johnson N, Schmidt MK, Broeks A, Verhoef S, Rutgers EJ, Swerdlow A, Ashworth A, Orr N, Schoemaker MJ, Figueroa J, Chanock SJ, Brinton L, Lissowska J, Couch FJ, Olson JE, Vachon C, Pankratz VS, Lambrechts D, Wildiers H, Van Ongeval C, van Limbergen E, Kristensen V, Grenaker Alnaes G, Nord S, Borresen-Dale AL, Nevanlinna H, Muranen TA, Aittomäki K, Blomqvist C, Chang-Claude J, Rudolph A, Seibold P, Flesch-Janys D, Fasching PA, Haeberle L, Ekici AB, Beckmann MW, Burwinkel B, Marme F, Schneeweiss A, Sohn C, Trentham-Dietz A, Newcomb P, Titus L, Egan KM, Hunter DJ, Lindstrom S, Tamimi RM, Kraft P, Rahman N, Turnbull C, Renwick A, Seal S, Li J, Liu J, Humphreys K, Benitez J, Pilar Zamora M, Arias Perez JI, Menéndez P, Jakubowska A, Lubinski J, Jaworska-Bieniek K, Durda K, Bogdanova NV, Antonenkova NN, Dörk T, Anton-Culver H, Neuhausen SL, Ziogas A, Bernstein L, Devilee P, Tollenaar RAEM, Seynaeve C, van Asperen CJ, Cox A, Cross SS, Reed MWR, Khusnutdinova E, Bermisheva M, Prokofyeva D, Takhirova Z, Meindl A, Schmutzler RK, Sutter C, Yang R, Schürmann P, Bremer M, Christiansen H, Park-Simon TW, Hillemanns P, Guénel P, Truong T, Menegaux F, Sanchez M, Radice P, Peterlongo P, Manoukian S, Pensotti V, Hopper JL, Tsimiklis H, Apicella C, Southey MC, Brauch H, Brüning T, Ko YD, Sigurdson AJ, Doody MM, Hamann U, Torres D, Ulmer HU, Försti A, Sawyer EJ, Tomlinson I, Kerin MJ, Miller N, Andrulis IL, Knight JA, Glendon G, Marie Mulligan A, Chenevix-Trench G, Balleine R, Giles GG, Milne RL, McLean C, Lindblom A, Margolin S, Haiman CA, Henderson BE, Schumacher F, Le Marchand L, Eilber U, Wang-Gohrke S, Hooning MJ, Hollestelle A, van den Ouweland AMW, Koppert LB, Carpenter J, Clarke C, Scott R, Mannermaa A, Kataja V, Kosma VM, Hartikainen JM, Brenner H, Arndt V, Stegmaier C, Karina Dieffenbach A, Winqvist R, Pylkäs K,
Swann R, Annie Perkins K, Goldberg MS, Labrèche F, Dumont M, Eccles DM,
Yao S, Zheng W, Halverson SL, González-Neira A, Pita G, Rosario Alonso M, Álvarez N, Herrero D, Tessier DC, Vincent D, Bacot F, Luccarini C, Baynes C, Ahmed S, Maranian M, Healey CS, Simard J, Hall P, Easton DF, Garcia-Closas M. Prediction of breast cancer risk based on profiling with common genetic variants. J Natl Cancer Inst 2015;107:djv036.
Dite GS, MacInnis RJ, Bickerstaffe A, Dowty JG, Allman R, Apicella C, Milne RL, Tsimiklis H, Phillips KA, Giles GG, Terry MB, Southey MC, Hopper JL. Breast cancer risk prediction using clinical models and 77 independent risk-associated SNPs for women aged under 50 years: Australian Breast Cancer Family Registry. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2016;25:359–65.
Brentnall AR, Evans DG, Cuzick J. Distribution of breast cancer risk from SNPs and classical risk factors in women of routine screening age in the UK. Br J Cancer 2014;110:827–8.
