In a case-control study of 495 breast cancer patients and 785 controls between 20 and 56 years of age, the risk of breast cancer associated with a family history of breast cancer was studied according to age and reproductive factors. The familial risk of breast cancer was not significantly modified by age at onset, age at menarche, number of children, age at first full-term pregnancy, menstrual cycle length or age at menopause. However, the familial risk significantly increased with the number of abortions fp < 0.05) and seemed to decrease after a natural menopause @ = 0.08). These results suggest that a familial predisposition to breast cancer exerts the same influence during the first six decades of life, except maybe when there are isolated or repeated events such as abortions or artificially imposed menopause, in which case the risk is apparently greater.
Breast neoplasm
Family history
Interaction
Reproductive factors
INTRODUCTION The association of a family history of breast cancer with an increased risk of breast cancer has been well documented. This risk increases with the number of affected relatives and the degree of kinship. The highest risk is observed when the affected relative has had a bilateral breast cancer at a young age l. However, less is known about the possible variations in the familial risk of women according to the classical risk factors for breast cancer, such as age at menarche, age at first full-term pregnancy, number of children, etc. The study of these variations is a useful approach to understanding the mechanisms of breast carcinogenesis. Indeed, if a risk factor modifies the effects of a family history, these two factors might act through a common pathway.
At the present time, no clear pattern emerges from the literature. These variations have been analysed in only a few studies and conflicting results were observed: age at menarche was found to modify the familial risk of breast cancer in 4 out of 9 reported studies, parity in 2 out of 8, age at first birth in 4 out of 9, personal history of benign breast disease in 3 out of 5, and menstrual cycle length in 1 out of 1 2-101.
We used information on the family history of breast cancer and breast cancer risk factors in a case-control study which had originally been designed to analyse the relationship between oral contraceptive use and the risk of breast cancer 1 11. We therefore decided to analyse the potential variations in familial risk according to the main risk factors for breast cancer.
SUBJECTS
AND METHODS
The data were obtained from a casecontrol study performed in five French public hospitals between 1983 and 1987 to investigate the relationship between oral contraceptive use and the risk of breast cancer. Details of how the study was organized have been previously reported I 11. Briefly, cases were between 20 and 56 years of age. They had a histologically proven infiltrating or in situ breast carcinoma. Three type of controls were eligible for each case: friends or colleagues, patients hospitalized for a non-malignant disease (except endocrinological diseases), and patients hospitalized for a malignant disease. The 111 controls with a malignant disease were excluded from the present analysis because recently published studies have indicated that a family history of breast cancer may be related to an increased risk for other cancers . The criteria for matching controls to cases were the centre, age at interview (f5 years) and year of interview ( & 14 months). Each case and her matched controls were interviewed by the same interviewer. Information was recorded on the occurrence of breast cancer in the family (sisters, mother, aunts and grandmothers), age at onset of cancer (only available when the affected relative was the mother), the number of sisters and aunts. When no family history of breast cancer was reported or when this history was not known, “no familial history” was assumed. The term “respondent” is used in the text for cases and controls indiscriminately, as opposed to their relatives. Age at interview and age at onset of breast cancer is the same for the cases; hence the reason why the term “age at interview” was used for cases and controls.
An unconditional multivariate logistic model employing the GLIM system was used to analyse the data in this study . The analysis took into account two matching variables (age at interview and centre) and seven potential confounders (educational level, marital status, age at menarche, age at first full-term-pregnancy, benign breast disease, number of children and menopausal status). Although the number of female relatives was similar for cases and controls, we also adjusted for this number because it could differ within each of the subgroups studied. To examine interactive effects of a family history with a given risk factor, the risk of a family history of breast cancer was calculated separately in each of the n subgroups constituted by the n classes of the studied factor. To test the interaction, a x2 homogeneity test with n - 1 df was performed, comparing the difference between the deviance of the above model and that of a model where the familial risk was the same in all the n classes. Both models were adjusted for the studied risk factor 141A. “non-significant” result corresponds to a p-value > 0.10.
RESULTS Description of the respondents
The cases and the two categories of controls did not differ as regards the number of female relatives (sisters and aunts) and the proportions of unknown familial characteristics (Table 1). Age at interview of the respondents
The risk of breast cancer was significantly higher in women who had a family history of breast cancer than in women who did not (Table 2). This risk was not modified according to the age at interview of the respondent. When the definition of a family history of breast cancer was restricted to at least one affected sister, or to an affected mother (with breast cancer diagnosed before 50 years of age, after 50 years or at any age) the risk did not vary with the age at interview of the respondent. Age of aflected mother at onset of cancer
When the risk of breast cancer was analysed for the entire sample according to the age at diagnosis of the affected mothers, the women whose mothers had been affected by a breast cancer before the age of 50 had a higher (but not statistically significant) risk of breast cancer than those whose mothers had been affected at a later age (OR = 2.3 vs OR = 1.1).
Type of familial relationship
To perform the homogeneity test between estimated odds ratios for different familial relationships, the risk associated with having at least one relative affected was broken down into six exclusive types of relationships in the following order: sister, mother, maternal aunt, paternal aunt, maternal grandmother, paternal grandmother (data not shown). The homogeneity test yielded a non-significant difference between the risks estimated for these types of familial relationships (p = 0.10). However, we observed a higher risk of breast cancer in women who had at least one affected sister than in women who had an affected mother (OR = 4.0 1.7-9.41 vs OR = 1.3 0.8-2.11 respectively).
Reproductive characteristics of the respondents
We studied separately the variations in the risk of breast cancer associated with a family history of breast cancer for seven parameters related to the respondent’s reproductive life (Table 3). No significant difference in familial risk was observed according to age at menarche, menstrual cycle length, first full-term pregnancy or number of children (tests for homogeneity for trend).
A significant difference familial risk according to abortions (p < 0.05). Abortion was found in the the number of is defined as or spontaneous abortion or induced abortion (therapeutic or non-therapeutic abortion). The highest risk was observed for women who had had two or more abortions (OR = 3.8 1.7-8.41). When we studied this variation for spontaneous abortion only or for induced abortion only, the pattern of variation was similar but the results of the homogeneity test were not statistically significant. This is probably due to the small number of subjects studied. When we studied the main effect of abortions on the risk of breast cancer, abortions were not found to be a risk factor of breast cancer in this study. Indeed, the risk of breast cancer was 1.0 0.7-l .3, and 1.1 0.7-l 51, respectively, for the women who had had 1, and 2 or more abortions, compared to women who had had no abortion.
No variation of the familial risk was found according to age at menopause. The analysis by type of menopause showed that women with a natural menopause seemed to have a decreased risk of breast cancer associated with a family history of breast cancer (OR = 0.5 0.2-1.51) as compared to either premenopausal women (OR = 1.7 1.2-2.41) or women who had undergone an artificially induced menopause (OR = 1.9 0.8-4.6).
No difference in breast cancer risks associated with a family history of breast cancer was found according to whether the respondent had had a benign breast disease or not (results not shown).
The difference in risk of breast cancer associated with a family history according to the presence or absence of bilaterality of the cases was not investigated because of the very small number of such patients.
DISCUSSION
The risk of breast cancer associated with a family history of breast cancer was studied according to the age at interview of the respondents, the age of the mother when her cancer had been diagnosed and the reproductive factors of the respondents.
The validity of the measurement of a family history of malignant disease could be challenged on the grounds of a possible bias caused by cases being more aware than controls of cancers in their family. This does not seem to be a problem in this study because cases and controls had a similar proportion of relatives with an unknown cancer status (Table 1). Moreover, Ring recently provided evidence to refute the existence of such a bias in the report of breast cancer among first-degree relatives. Go et al. , in a study that involved contacting relatives or reviewing records to verify reports, found no difference between the accuracy of reports from women who themselves had had breast cancer and those who had not. Furthermore, in our study, there is no reason to assume that this presumed bias might differ according to the subgroup studied.
Our data show no modification of the familial risk according to the respondent’s age at interview. A low rate of a positive family history (10.1% among cases and 6.3% among controls for first-degree relatives), the relatively small size of our sample and the fact that we had no data for women older than 56 might explain this negative result. However, the risks in the different age groups varied within a very narrow range, suggesting that, if there is any effect of age on the familial risk, it is weak. Similar findings have already been reported in the literature . However, other studies reported opposite results: two found a higher risk of breast cancer associated with a family history among older women  17, 181,whereas six others found a higher familial risk among younger women (before 40 to 45 depending on the study) 3-5,20-221. Byrne et al. found no modification of the familial risk according to the age at interview of the women when the definition of a family history was a mother with breast cancer, but a higher familial risk of breast cancer among the younger women when the definition of family history was at least one sister with breast cancer.
The results of our study are in accordance with those of Byrne et al. that support the hypothesis that an early age at diagnosis of an affected mother increases the risk of breast cancer in the respondents. Our failure to find a significant difference is likely to be due to the very small numbers compared, when the total number of affected mothers were subdivided according to their age at onset. Mettlin et al. 171 analysed their data by a cross-classification of age at interview of respondents, and age at diagnosis of breast cancer in the first-degree relatives (mother, sisters and daughters). They found a higher risk of breast cancer in younger women only when the breast cancer of relatives was diagnosed at an early age, and a higher risk of breast cancer in older women when breast cancer in relatives was diagnosed at a later age. The result concerning older women could not be verified because the women in the study were not old enough.
The recent identification of families with a great number of breast cancers occurring later in life and two recent studies which found a higher familial risk in older women 17, 181 suggest the existence of a familial component in the aetiology of breast cancer in older, as well as younger, women. To date, familial clustering at a late age at the onset of breast cancer has been largely overlooked.
Type of familial relationship
In the present study, the highest risk was observed when a sister had been affected by breast cancer. This may be due to the mean age of sisters at diagnosis of cancer which was obviously younger than that of the mothers since the risk period observed was longer for mothers than for sisters. Moreover a younger age at onset among relatives is well known to increase the familial risk l. Therefore the observed higher risk could just be due to the effect of age and not be linked to the type of familial relationship. However, this is unlikely since the risk associated with an affected sister is higher, although non-significantly, than that associated with an affected mother with onset before the age of 50 (OR = 4.2 vs OR = 2.3).
The higher risk observed when a sister was affected could be explained by longer exposure to a common environment between sisters than between mother and daughter. It could also be explained by a recessive gene. This hypothesis however, is not consistent with some genetic analyses of families reported in the literature, which have concluded that breast cancer is most probably due to a dominant gene 23-281. Some studies do not conclude in favour of a particular mode of inheritance for the disease 29-311, while others indicate that an autosomal recessive gene most likely accounts for the distribution of the disease in subgroups of families 32-341. More investigations are needed to elucidate this problem.
We found no significant variations in the familial risk of breast cancer according to age at menarche, menstrual cycle length, number of children, age at first full-term pregnancy or age at menopause. However, the effect of a family history on breast cancer risk was found to increase with the number of abortions and to depend on the type of menopause. A natural menopause seemed to decrease the risk associated with the family history, although this effect was only of borderline significance. No significant difference in familial risk was observed in the analysis according to the age at menopause. However, similar risks were found for women who were older than 50 at menopause and women with a natural menopause on the one hand, and for women who were younger than 50 at menopause and women with an artificial menopause on the other hand. This makes it difficult to determine whether the reason for decreased familial risk of breast cancer is due to a late age at menopause or to a natural menopause. Other authors did not find such a variation, either for menopausal status or for the type of menopause. Additional studies with older women are needed to clarify this pattern.
The interaction between a family history of breast cancer and two or more abortions was surprising because abortions were not found to be a risk factor of breast cancer in this study. To our knowledge, the present investigation is the only one which has examined the interactive effect of a family history of breast cancer and the number of abortions. This finding should be verified before any attempt is made to formulate a hypothesis, because like the other statistically significant results in this study, it could be due to chance, given the number of statistical tests performed.
This result shows that studies of interactions should not be limited to interactions with known risk factors for a given disease. Factors that do not seem to have an effect, or that have only just a weak effect, on the whole population could be important in some subgroups. A systematic search for such interactions, of course, leads to methodological problems of multiple testing.
Few studies have analysed the variation in the familial risk according to reproductive factors, and conflicting results have been observed among those that have 2-lo. Moreover, Byrne et al. found that the effects of a mother’s history and a sister’s history were modified in different directions by different factors. If this kind of complication exists, then the difficulty in tracking down interactions between a family history and other factors may be due to the mixture of different effects which are included in the measurement of family history.
In conclusion, the observation that the familial risk was not modified by age at interview (limited to 56 years), age at menarche, cycle length or age at first full-term pregnancy suggests that a familial predisposition to breast cancer might exert the same influence during the first six decades of life. This effect could be amplified, however, by isolated or repeated events, such as abortions. A family history of breast cancer has a major influence on the risk of developing breast cancer in women. The analysis of interactions between a family history of breast cancer and other factors seems to be a useful approach to understanding the mechanisms of breast carcinogenesis, since the factors that modify the effects of a family history may act through common pathways.
Acknowledgements-This study was supported by a grant from the Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Mtdicale (PRC No. 132016), attributed to R. Renaud, co-ordinator. We would like to thank A. Mollie who helped us with fruitful discussions and L. Saint Ange for the linguistic revision of the manuscript.
