Context: Although rural-urban cancer disparities have been explored with some depth, disparities within seemingly homogeneous rural areas have received limited attention. (IRR = 1.14; 95% CI, 1.04-1.26). Conclusions: Socioeconomic deprivation, health behaviors, and lung cancer incidence varied across rural regions. Our findings underscore the importance of However, exploration of intrarural cancer incidence may have identifying cancer risk heterogeneity, even within a state, to important public health implications for risk assessment, cancer effectively target risk factor reduction and cancer control control, and resource allocation. Objective: The objective of this interventions.
Smoking history also significantly differed by region. Mean former/current smoking prevalence in IL-N, IL-C, and IL-S counties was 46.4%, 48.2%, and 51.4%, respectively (P = .006). In unadjusted analysis, IL-C (IRR = 1.12; 95% confidence interval CI, 1.02-1.23) and IL-S (IRR = 1.24; 95% CI, 1.13-1.35) had increased lung cancer incidence compared with IL-N. Elevated risk remained in IL-S after adjusting for relevant factors such as smoking and socioeconomic deprivation
The Institute of Medicine, the National Cancer Institute, and the American Society of Clinical Oncology have all identified rural residence as a risk factor for health disparities (broadly) and cancer disparities (specifically) and thus a research priority.1-3 Although rural-urban disparities research considerably lags that for racial or socioeconomic disparities, studies have indicated that rural residents may be less likely to adhere to cancer screening recommendations (eg, mammography, colonoscopy), are often diagnosed with cancer at a later stage, and experience higher cancer mortality.4-8 Furthermore, other cancer risk factors such as lower socioeconomic status, limited access to care, obesity,
The authors have nothing to disclose, nor is there any funding source to note. The authors thank Dr Steve Verhulst for his guidance in statistical design and Dr Tiefu Shen and Kyle Garner for their assistance in using the Illinois State Cancer Registry public data set. and smoking are frequently more prevalent in rural areas.3,9-12
Many studies examining rural disparities have dichotomized federal rural-urban measures such as the Rural Urban Continuum Code or the Rural Urban Commuting Area.13-15 Although facilitating statistical analyses, simple dichotomous rural-urban classifications frequently lack sensitivity to local variations in rural areas.16 There has been some study of cancer risk variation across smaller geographical scales (regions or state) that come closer to capturing geographically precise cancer variations.17-19 However, none of these studies explored intrastate, rural-specific differences in cancers that could be prevented or mitigated with behavior modification and/or adherence to recommended screening modalities.
We hypothesize that the bulk characterization of a wide geographical area into a single rural category is frequently inadequate to characterize cancer risk that may vary over smaller scales. Such oversimplification may hinder state-level resource allocation for preventative and screening efforts such as smoking cessation, mammography, and colonoscopy. While epidemiological work in Illinois suggests that cancer risk may significantly vary among rural populations, research into differences in cancer incidence among rural areas within the same state is nearly nonexistent.20 Our objective was to examine intrarural variations in Illinois cancer incidence in the context of regional variation in risk factor prevalence. ● Methods
County rurality was determined using the Illinois State Cancer Registry’s density groups, which categorize counties on the basis of 1990 population density, rate of growth, and the modified Rural Urban Continuum Code.21 Illinois’s 83 rural counties were divided into 3 geographic regions (Figure). The rationale for this a priori regionalization was to create regions of similar size and utilize commonly accepted demarcations. The 22 counties north of Interstate 74 were “Northern Rural” (IL-N), the 29 counties south of Interstate 74 and north of Interstate 70 were “Central Rural” (IL-C), and the 32 counties south of Interstate 70 were “Southern Rural” (IL-S).
Age-adjusted incidence rates for 5 cancers categories (all total, female breast, colorectal, lung, prostate) were derived from the Illinois State Cancer Registry public-use county-level cancer incidence data set (20062010) and age-adjusted using the 2000 US standard million population.22 Following an algorithm developed by Ananthakrishnan and colleagues,23 for each county we calculated a socioeconomic deprivation score (SEDS) incorporating 4 socioeconomic indicators available from the 2010 US Census: median income, % living in poverty, % uninsured, and % over the age of 25 who were high school graduates.24 Scores of 0 to 3 were considered low SEDS, whereas scores of 45 and 6-8 were considered moderate and high SEDS, respectively. Racial characteristics were obtained from the US Census Bureau. County-level health behaviors prevalence estimates were acquired from the Illinois Behavioral Risk Factors Surveillance System, including smoking and obesity prevalence, and colonoscopy, mammography, and prostate-specific antigen test utilization.25 General practitioner densities for each county was calculated from Area Health Resource File data.26
Regional distributions of race, socioeconomic factors, health behaviors, screening utilization, and access to care were evaluated using the χ 2 test of independence for categorical variables and analysis of variance for continuous variables. Unadjusted and adjusted incidence rate ratios (IRRs) were calculated using negative binomial or Poisson regression, depending on dispersion, to compare the 3 rural regions for each cancer category. Age-adjusted cancer incidence rates were the outcome variable in regression analyses, as has been done in previous studies.27,28 County population, SEDS, general practitioner density, and relevant racial or health behaviors for each cancer type were included in adjusted analyses. The Springfield Committee for Research Involving Human Subjects (institutional review board) determined this to be nonhuman subject research and exempt from further review. ● Results The 3 rural regions differed by demographic and socioeconomic factors, health behaviors, and screening adherence (Table 1). Demographically, IL-N counties had a mean Hispanic population greater than counties in other regions. With the exception of insurance status, socioeconomic factors varied across the rural regions. A higher proportion of IL-S counties (40.6%) were in the highest SEDS category than those of IL-C and IL-N counties (6.9% and 4.5%, respectively).
The mean percentage of obesity prevalence in the FIGURE ● Illinois Rural Regions Designation IL-S counties (30.2%) exceeded mean rates in IL-C (28.8%) and IL-N (27.1%) counties. In addition, the mean percentage of IL-S counties’ residents who had ever smoked (51.4%) exceeded that of IL-C (48.2%) and IL-N (46.4%) counties. Mammography adherence varied across regions.
Regional differences were seen in mean age-adjusted cancer incidence rates (Table 2). Mean lung cancer incidence in the IL-S counties (86.8 per 100 000) exceeded that of the counties in the IL-C and IL-N regions (78.4 and 70.2 per 100 000, respectively), but no significant incidence rate differences were seen for other cancers.
The unadjusted lung cancer IRR for the IL-C counties and the IL-S counties were elevated at 1.12 (95% confidence interval CI, 1.02-1.23) and 1.24 (95% CI, 1.131.35), respectively (Table 3). After adjusting for county We explored intrastate rural differences in cancer incidence across Illinois. Although rural Illinois, like many other states, is usually considered a homogeneous population, our results indicated that demographic, P Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; IRR, incidence rate ratio; PSA, prostate-specific antigen; SEDS, socioeconomic deprivation score. aReferent = Northern Rural for all analyses. socioeconomic, and behavioral characteristics significantly varied across rural regions. Overall, the IL-S counties experienced greater socioeconomic deprivation and had higher rates of obesity and smoking than the other regions, and women in IL-C counties were more likely to have had a mammogram. After adjustment for county population size, socioeconomic deprivation score, smoking prevalence, and general practitioner density, IL-S counties still experienced increased lung cancer incidence.
The literature suggests that rural areas should not be viewed as synonymous throughout the country, and our results indicate that the same could be said for risk and incidence in rural areas within a given state.29,30 We found that IL-S counties were both poorer and had higher rates of cancer risk factors, including higher rates of smoking and obesity, than IL-C and IL-N counties. These findings corroborate with other studies that suggest resource allocation for public health interventions would benefit from precise geographic targeting based upon and areas behavioral risk factors and barriers.9,31
In addition, our results suggest that, even after considering socioeconomic deprivation and modifiable risk factors, intrastate rural cancer incidence differences exist. This may be attributable in part to differing environmental and occupational exposures that are difficult to capture. For example, the data show that IL-S counties have higher lung cancer rates and some studies have indicated that coal mining exposure has been shown to increase lung cancer risk independently of, and synergistically with, smoking.32-37 Illinois has the third largest coal resource in the country, with 68% of the state underlain by the coal-bearing Illinois County population, SEDS, % ever-smoker, % obesity, general practitioner
density County population, SEDS, % ever-smoker, general practitioner density County population, SEDS, % ever smoker, % obesity, % black, % who had
a colonoscopy, general practitioner density County population, SEDS, % black, % who had a mammogram, general
practitioner density County population, SEDS, % black, % who had a PSA test, general
practitioner density Basin, and the majority of recent coal mining activity has occurred in southern Illinois.37 Further exploration of coal mining’s effect on elevated cancer risk may help elucidate what public health interventions may be most effective to improve the observed lung cancer disparity.
In a broader context, our results indicate that caution should be exercised when applying federal rural designations at a state level. Our study utilized a state-specific urban-rural designation instead of a federal designation. For example, multiple Illinois counties east of the St Louis, Missouri, metropolitan area are categorized as urban using the federal Rural Urban Continuum Code because of their adjacency to a metropolitan area but are categorized as rural using the Illinois State Cancer Registry density groupings because of their smaller population densities and rate of growth. Federal rural designations may not have appropriately characterized rural regions. Furthermore, our results reemphasize suggestions of Meilleur and colleagues,29 who indicated that it is necessary to consider rural residence’s effect on cancer outcomes in a broader, contextual framework rather than solely using rurality as a descriptive measure. ● Conclusions We explored intrastate rural cancer risk factor and incidence differences for all malignant cancers, breast, colorectal, lung, and prostate cancers. We found regional differences in socioeconomic and health behaviors.
Elevated lung cancer rates were identified in IL-S counties, even after controlling for relevant factors such as smoking. Clearer understanding of cancer incidence differences is important both to provide targeted public health interventions for risk factor reduction and cancer control and to provide rationale and guidance for resource allocation. In a broader context, our results also underscore the importance of considering the heterogeneity of rural areas and the limitations that federal rural designations have in characterizing rural areas for state-level public health purposes.
Intrastate Variations in Rural Cancer Risk and Incidence ❘ 7
